The Theory and Practice
of Alchemy
Part Two
All truE PhilosoPhErs of the natural or hermetic sciences begin their
labors with a prayer to the supreme alchemist of the universe, beseeching
his assistance in the consummation of the magnum opus. the prayer that
follows, written in a provincial German centuries ago by an adept now unknown, is representative: “ o holy and hallowed trinity, thou undivided and triple unity! Cause me
to sink into the abyss of Thy limitless eternal Fire, for only in that Fire can the mortal nature of man be changed into humble dust, while the new body of the salt union lies in the light. Oh, melt me and transmute me in this Thy holy Fire, so that on the day at Thy command the fiery waters of the Holy Spirit draw me out from the dark dust, giv-ing me new birth and making me alive with his breath. may i also be exalted through
the humble humility of thy son, rising through his assistance out of the dust and ashes
and changing into a pure spiritual body of rainbow colors like unto the transparent, crystal-like, paradisiacal gold, that my own nature may be redeemed and purified like the elements before me in these glasses and bottles. Diffuse me in the waters of life as though I were in the wine cellar of the eternal Solomon. Here the fire of Thy love will receive new fuel and will blaze forth so that no streams can extinguish it. Through the aid of this divine fire, may I in the end be found worthy to be called into the illumination of the righteous. may i then be sealed up with the light of the new world that i may also
attain unto the immortality and glory where there shall be no more alternation of light and darkness. amen.”
THE ORIGIN OF ALCHEMICAL FORMULÆ
Apparently but few of the mediæval alchemists discovered the Great Arcanum without
aid, some authors declaring that none of them attained the desired end without the assis-tance of a master or teacher. in every instance the identity of these masters has been carefully concealed, and even during the middle ages speculation ran rife concerning them.
it was customary to call such illuminated sages adepts, a title which indicated that they possessed the true secrets of transmutation and multiplication. these adepts were polyonymous individuals who unexpectedly appeared and disappeared again, leaving no trace of their whereabouts. There are indications that a certain degree of organization existed among them. The most powerful of the alchemical organizations were the Rosicrucians, the illuminati, and certain arabian and syrian sects.

495i n the documents which follow, references are made to the “ brethren” or “ brothers”.
these are to signify that those who had actually accomplished the Magnum Opus were
banded together and known to each other by cipher codes and secret signs or symbols.
apparently a number of these illuminated adepts dwelt in arabia, for several of the great
European alchemists were initiated in asia minor. When a disciple of the alchemical arts
had learned the supreme secret, he guarded it jealously, revealing to no man his priceless treasure. he was not permitted to disclose it even to the members of his immediate family.
as the years passed, one who had discovered the secret – or, more properly, one to
whom it had been revealed – sought for some younger man worthy to be entrusted with the formulæ. To this one, and to this one only, as a rule, the philosopher was permitted to disclose the arcanum. the younger man then became the “philosophical son” of the old
sage, and to him the latter bequeathed his secrets. Occasionally, however, an adept, on finding a sincere and earnest seeker, would instruct him in the fundamental principles of the art, and if the disciple persisted, he was quietly initiated into the august fraternity of the brethren. in such manner the alchemical processes were preserved, but the number of
those who knew them did not increase rapidly.
During the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries a considerable number of
alchemical adepts made their way from place to place throughout Europe, appearing and disappearing apparently at will. according to popular tradition, these adepts were immortal, and kept themselves alive by means of the mysterious medicine that was one of the goals of alchemical aspiration. it is asserted that some lived hundreds of years, taking no
food except this elixir, a few drops of which would preserve their youth for a long period of time. that such mysterious men did exist there can be little doubt, as their presence is
attested by scores of reliable witnesses.
It is further asserted that they are still to be found by those who have qualified them -
selves to contact them. the philosophers taught that like attracts like, and that when the
disciple has developed a virtue and integrity acceptable to the adepts they will appear to him and reveal those parts of the secret processes which cannot be discovered without such help. “Wisdom is as a flower from which the bee its honey makes and the spider poison, each according to its own nature.” (By an unknown adept.)
The reader must bear in mind at all times that the formulæ and emblems of alchemy are
to be taken primarily as allegorical symbols; for until their esoteric significance has been comprehended, their literal interpretation is valueless. nearly every alchemical formula has
one element purposely omitted, it being decided by the mediæval philosophers that those who could not with their own intelligence discover that missing substance or process were not qualified to be entrusted with secrets which could give them control over great masses of humanity and likewise subject to their will the elemental forces of nature.
THE EMERALD TABLE OF HERMES
The oldest and most revered of all the alchemical formulæ is the sacred Emerald Tablet of hermes. authorities do not agree as to the genuineness of this table, some declaring
it to be a post-Christian fraud, but there is much evidence that, regardless of its author, the

Table is of great antiquity. While the symbol of the Emerald Table is of special Masonic
import – relating as it does to the personality of CHiram (Hiram) – it is first and fundamentally an alchemical formula, relating both to the alchemy of the base metals and the divine alchemy of human regeneration.
THE KEY TO ALCHEMY ACCORDING TO THE EGYPTIANS.From Kircher’s Œdipus Ægyptiacus.
the priests of Egypt not
only used the scarab as a symbol of regeneration but also discovered in its habits many analogies to the secret process whereby base met-als could be transmuted into gold. they saw in the egg
of the scarab the seed of the metals, and the above figure shows the path of this seed through the various plan-etary bodies until, finally reaching the center, it is per-fected and then returns again to its source. the words in
the mall spiral at the top read: “the spiral Progress of the mundane spirit.” after
the scarab has wound its way around the spiral to the cen-ter of the lower part of the figure, it returns to the upper world along the path bearing the words: “return of the spirit to the center of unity.”
in Dr. sigismund bacstrom’s collection of alchemical manuscripts is a section devoted
to the translations and interpretations of this remarkable tablet, which was known to the
ancients as the Tabula Smaragdina. Dr. bacstrom was initiated into the brotherhood of
the rose Cross on the island of mauritius by one of those unknown adepts who at that
time called himself Comte de Chazal. Dr. bacstrom’s translations and notes on the Emerald tablet are, in part, as follows, the actual text being reproduced in capital letters:
“The Emerald Table, the Most Ancient Monument of the Chaldeans concerning
the Lapis Philosophorum (the stone of the philosophers).
“The Emerald Table furnishes the origin of the allegorical history of King Hiram (rather Chiram). the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and hebrews in what concerns

Chiram have taken their knowledge from one and the same fountain; Homerus,
who relates this history in a different manner, followed that original, and virgil
followed Homerus, as Hesiodus took the subject for his theogony likewise from
thence, which Ovidius took afterwards for a pattern for his metamorphosis. the
knowledge of nature’s secret operations constitutes the principal sense of all these
ancient writings, but ignorance framed out of it that external or veiled mythology
and the lower class of people turned it into idolatry.
“The Genuine Translation from the Original Very Ancient Chaldee is as
Follows:
“THE SECRET WORKS OF CHIRAM ONE in EssEnCE, but thrEE in
asPECt .
“(The two first large words mean the Secret Work.)“(The second line in large letters, reads: Chiram Telat Machasot, i.e. Chiram
the Universal Agent, One in Essence but three in aspect .)
‘it is truE, no liE, CErtain, anD to bE DEPEnDED uPon, thE
SUPERIOR AGREES WITH THE INFERIOR, AND THE INFERIOR WITH THE SUPERIOR, TO EFFECT THAT ONE TRULY WONDERFUL WORK. AS ALL THINGS OWE THEIR EXISTENCE TO THE WILL OF THE ONLY
ONE, so all thinGs oWE thEir oriGin to thE ONE ONLY THING,
THE MOST HIDDEN, BY THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE ONLY GOD. thE
FATHER OF THAT ONE ONLY THING is THE SUN, its mothEr is THE
MOON, thE WinD CarriEs it in its bEll Y; but its noursE is A
SPIRITUOUS EARTH. that ONE ONLY THING (after God) IS THE FATHER
OF ALL THINGS IN THE UNIVERSE. ITS POWER IS PERFECT, AFTER IT has bEEn unitED to a sPirituous Earth.
“(Process – First Distillation.) SEPARATE THAT SPIRITUOUS EARTH
FROM THE DENSE OR CRUDE BY MEANS OF A GENTLE HEAT, WITH muCh attEntion.
“(Last Digestion.) IN GREAT MEASURE IT ASCENDS FROM THE EARTH
uP to hEa vEn, anD DEsCEnDs aGain, nEWborn, on thE Earth,
AND THE SUPERIOR AND THE INFERIOR ARE INCREASED IN POWER. The Azoth ascends from the Earth, from the bottom of the Glass, and redescends in Veins and drops into the Earth and by this continual circulation the Azoth is more and more subtilized, Volatilizes Sol and carries the volatilized Solar atoms along
with it and thereby becomes a Solar Azoth, i.e. our third, and genuine Sophic Mercury, and this circulation of the Solar Azoth must continue until it ceases of itself, and the Earth has sucked it all in, when it muse become the black pitchy matter, the Toad [the substances in the alchemical retort and also the lower elements in the
body of man], which denotes complete putrefaction or Death of the Compound.