The Theory and Practice
of Alchemy
Part One
AlChEmY , thE sECrEt art of the land of Khem, is one of the two oldest
sciences known to the world. the other is astrology. the beginnings of both
extend back into the obscurity of prehistoric times. according to the earliest
records extant, alchemy and astrology were considered as divinely revealed to man so that
by their aid he might regain his lost estate. according to old legends preserved by the rabbins, the angel at the gate of Eden instructed adam in the mysteries of Qabbalah and of
alchemy, promising that when the human race had thoroughly mastered the secret wisdom concealed within these inspired arts, the curse of the forbidden fruit would be removed and man might again enter into the Garden of the lord. as man took upon himself “coats
of skins” (physical bodies) at the time of his fall, so these sacred sciences were brought by him into the lower worlds incarnated in dense vehicles, through which their spiritual transcendental natures could no longer manifest themselves. therefore they were considered as being dead or lost.
The earthly body of alchemy is chemistry, for chemists do not realize that half of The
Book of Torah is forever concealed behind the veil of Isis (see the Tarot), and that so long
as they study only material elements they can at best discover but half of the mystery. Astrology has crystallized into astronomy, whose votaries ridicule the dreams of ancient seers and sages, deriding their symbols as meaningless products of superstition. nevertheless, the intelligentsia of the modern world can never pass behind the veil which divides the seen from the unseen except in the way appointed – the Mysteries .
What is life? What is intelligence? What is force? these are the problems to the solution of which the ancients consecrated their temples of learning. Who shall say that they did not answer those questions? Who would recognize the answers if given? Is it possible that under the symbols of alchemy and astrology lies concealed a wisdom so abstruse that the mind of this race is not qualified to conceive its principles?
the Chaldeans, Phœnicians, and babylonians were familiar with the principles of alchemy, as were many early oriental races. it was practiced in Greece and rome; was the
master science of the Egyptians. Khem was an ancient name for the land of Egypt; and
both the words alchemy and chemistry are a perpetual reminder of the priority of Egypt’s
scientific knowledge. According to the fragmentary writings of those early peoples, al-chemy was to them no speculative art. they implicitly believed in the multiplication of
metals; and in the face of their reiterations both the scholar and the materialist should be more kindly in their consideration of alchemical theorems. Evolutionists trace the unfold-

481ment of the arts and sciences up through the growing intelligence of the prehistoric man,
while others, of a transcendental point of view, like to consider them as being direct rev-elations from God.
many interesting solutions to the riddle of alchemy’s origin have been advanced.
one is that alchemy was revealed to man by the mysterious Egyptian demigod hermes
Trismegistus. This sublime figure, looming through the mists of time and bearing in his hand the immortal Emerald, is credited by the Egyptians as being the author of all the arts and sciences. In honor of him all scientific knowledge was gathered under the general title of the hermetic arts. When the body of hermes was interred in the
Valley of Ebron (or Hebron), the divine Emerald was buried with it. Many centuries afterward the Emerald was discovered – according to one version, by an arabian initiate; according to another, by Alexander the Great, King of Macedon. By means of the power of this Emerald, upon which were the mysterious inscriptions of the thrice
Great Hermes – thirteen sentences in all – Alexander conquered all the then known world. Not having conquered himself, however, he ultimately failed. Regardless of his glory and power, the prophecies of the talking trees were fulfilled, and Alexander was cut down in the midst of his triumph. (There are persistent rumors to the effect that alexander was an initiate of high order who failed because of his inability to
withstand the temptations of power.)
E. Y . Kenealy, quoting from the Cosmodromium of Doctor Gobelin Persona, describes
the incident of Alexander and the talking trees, into the presence of which the King of macedon is said to have been brought while on his campaign in india:
“And now Alexander marched into other quarters equally dangerous; at one
time over the tops of mountains, at another through dark valleys, in which his army was attacked by serpents and wild beasts, until after three hundred days he came into a most pleasant mountain, on whose sides hung chains or ropes of gold. This mountain had two thousand and fifty steps all of purest sapphire, by which one could ascend to the summit, and near this alexander encamped. and on a day,
alexander with his twelve Princes, ascended by the aforenamed steps to the top
of the mountain, and found there a Palace marvellously beautiful, having twelve
Gates, and seventy windows of the purest gold, and it was called the Palace of the sun, and there was in it a temple all of gold, before whose gates were vine trees
bearing bunches of carbuncles and pearls, and alexander and his Princes having
entered the Palace, found there a man lying on a golden bedstead; he was very
stately and beautiful in appearance, and his head and beard were white as snow. then alexander and his princes bent the knee to the sage who spake thus: ‘alexander, thou shalt now see what no earthly man hath ever before seen or heard.’ to
whom alexander made answer: ‘o, sage, most happy, how dost thou know me?’
he replied: ‘before the wave of the Deluge covered the face of the earth i knew thy
works.’ he added: ‘Wouldst thou behold the most hallowed trees of the sun and
moon, which announce all future things?’ alexander made answer: ‘it is well, my
lord; greatly do we long to see them.’ (...)

482“then the sage said: ‘Put away your rings and ornaments, and take off your
shoes, and follow me.’ and alexander did so, and choosing out three from the
Princes, and leaving the rest to await his return, he followed the sage, and came
to the trees of the sun and moon. the tree of the sun has leaves of red gold, the
tree of the moon has leaves of silver, and they are very great, and alexander, at
the suggestion of the Sage questioned the Trees, asking if he should return in triumph to macedon? to which the trees gave answer, no, but that he should live yet
another year and eight months, after which he should die by a poisoned cup. and
when he inquired, Who was he who should give him that poison? he received no reply, and the tree of the moon said to him, that his mother, after a most shameful
and unhappy death, should lie long unburied, but that happiness was in store for his sisters.” (See The Book of Enoch, The Second Messenger of God .)
THE LEA VES OF
HERMES’ SACRED TREE.
redrawn from an originalmanuscript dated 1577.
In his Key to Alchemy, Samuel
norton divides into fourteen parts the processes or states through which the alchemical substances pass from the time they are first placed in the test tube until ready as medicine for plants, minerals, or men:
1. Solution, the act of passing from a gaseous or solid condition, into one of liquidity. 2. Filtration, the mechanical
separation of a liquid from the undissolved particles suspended in it. 3. Evaporation, the changing or converting from a liquid or solid state into a vaporous state with the aid of heat. 4. Distillation, an operation
by which a volatile liquid may be separated from substances which it holds in solution. 5. Separation, the operation of disuniting or decompos-ing substances.
6. Rectification , the process of refining or purifying any substance by repeated distillation.
7. Calcination , the conversion into a powder or calx by the action of heat; expulsion of the volatile substance from a matter.

483 8. Commixtion, the blending of different ingredients into new compounds or mass.
9. Purification (through putrefaction ), disintegration by spontaneous decomposition; decay by
artificial means.
10. Inhibition , the process of holding back or restraining.
11. Fermentation , the conversion of organic substances into new compounds in the presence of a
ferment.
12. Fixation , the act or process of ceasing to be a fluid and becoming firm; state of being fixed.
13. Multiplication , the act or process of multiplying or increasing in number, the state of being
multiplied.
14. Projection , the process of turning the base metals into gold.
in all probability, the so-called talking trees were merely strips of wood with tables
of letters upon them, by means of which oracles were evoked. at one time books written
upon wood were called “talking trees.” The difficulty in deciding the origin of alchemy is
directly due to ignoring the lost continent of atlantis. the Great arcanum was the most
prized of the secrets of the Atlantean priestcraft. When the land of Atlas sank, hierophants of the Fire Mystery brought the formula to Egypt, where it remained for centuries in the possession of the sages and philosophers. it gradually moved into Europe, where its secrets are still preserved intact.
During the middle ages, alchemy was not only a philosophy and a science but also a
religion. those who rebelled against the religious limitations of their day concealed their
philosophic teachings under the allegory of gold-making. in this way they preserved their
personal liberty and were ridiculed rather than persecuted. alchemy is a threefold art, its
mystery well symbolized by a triangle. Its symbol is 3 times 3 – three elements or pro-cesses in three worlds or spheres. The 3 times 3 is part of the mystery of the 33rd degree of Freemasonry, for 33 is 3 times 3, which is 9, the number of esoteric man and the number of emanations from the root of the Divine tree. it is the number of worlds nourished by
the four rivers that pour out of the Divine mouth as the verbum fiat. beneath the so-called
symbolism of alchemy is concealed a magnificent concept, for this ridiculed and despised craft still preserves intact the triple key to the gates of eternal life. Realizing, therefore, that alchemy is a mystery in three worlds – the divine, the human, and the elemental – it can easily be appreciated why the sages and philosophers created and evolved an intricate allegory to conceal their wisdom.
alchemy is the science of multiplication and is based upon the natural phenomenon of
growth. “nothing from nothing comes,” is an extremely ancient adage. alchemy is not the
process of making something from nothing; it is the process of increasing and improving that which already exists. if a philosopher were to state that a living man could be made
from a stone, the unenlightened would probably exclaim, “impossible!” thus would they
reveal their ignorance, for to the wise it is known that in every stone is the seed of man. a philosopher might declare that a universe could be made out of a man, but the foolish
would regard this as an impossibility, not realizing that a man is a seed from which a uni-verse may be brought forth.
God is the “within” and the “without” of all things. the supreme one manifests himself through growth, which is an urge from within outward, a struggle for expression and