Alchemy and Its Exponents
Is thE transmutation of base metals into gold possible? is the idea
one at which the learned of the modern world can afford to scoff? alchemy
was more than a speculative art: it was also an operative art. since the time
of the immortal Hermes, alchemists have asserted (and not without substantiating
evidence) that they could manufacture gold from tin, silver, lead, and mercury. that
the galaxy of brilliant philosophic and scientific minds who, over a period of two thousand years, affirmed the actuality of metallic transmutation and multiplication, could be completely sane and rational on all other problems of philosophy and sci-ence, yet hopelessly mistaken on this one point, is untenable. nor is it reasonable that
the hundreds declaring to have seen and performed transmutations of metals could all have been dupes, imbeciles, or liars.
those assuming that all alchemists were of unsound mentality would be forced to put
in this category nearly all the philosophers and scientists of the ancient and mediæval worlds. Emperors, princes, priests, and common townsfolk have witnessed the appar -
ent miracle of metallic metamorphosis. in the face of existing testimony, anyone is
privileged to remain unconvinced, but the scoffer elects to ignore evidence worthy of respectful consideration. many great alchemists and hermetic philosophers occupy an
honored niche in the Hall of Fame, while their multitudinous critics remain obscure. To list all these sincere seekers after nature’s great arcanum is impossible, but a few will
suffice to acquaint the reader with the superior types of intellect who interested them-selves in this abstruse subject.
among the more prominent names are those of thomas norton, isaac of holland,
Basil Valentine (the supposed discoverer of antimony), Jean de Meung, Roger Bacon, Al-bertus Magnus, Quercetanus Gerber (the Arabian who brought the knowledge of alchemy to Europe through his writings), Paracelsus, Nicholas Flarnmel, John Frederick Helvetius, raymond lully, alexander sethon, michael sendivogius, Count bernard of treviso, sir
George Ripley, Picus de Mirandola, John Dee, Henry Khunrath, Michael Maier, Thomas Vaughan, J. B. von Helmont, John Heydon, Lascaris, Thomas Charnock, Synesius (Bish-op of Ptolemais), morieu, the Comte di Cagliostro, and the Comte de st.-Germain. there
are legends to the effect that King Solomon and Pythagoras were alchemists and that the former manufactured by alchemical means the gold used in his temple.
albert Pike takes sides with the alchemical philosophers by declaring that the gold of
the hermetists was a reality. he says:
“the hermetic science, like all the real sciences, is mathematically demonstrable. Its results, even material, are as rigorous as that of a correct equation. The hermetic Gold is not only a true dogma, a light without shadow, a truth without

467alloy of falsehood; it is also a material gold, real, pure, the most precious that can
be found in the mines of the earth.” so much for the masonic angle.
ALBERTUS MAGNUS.
From Jovius’ Vitae Illustrium Virorum.
Albert de Groot was born about 1206 and
died at the age of 74. It has been said of
him that he was “magnus in magia, major in
philosophia, maximus in theologia.” he was
a member of the Dominican order and the
mentor of St. Thomas Aquinas in alchemy
and philosophy. among other positions of
dignity occupied by albertus magnus was
that of bishop of regensburg. he was beatified in 1622. Albertus was an Aristotelian
philosopher, an astrologer, and a profound
student of medicine and physics. During
his youth, he was considered of deficient
mentality, but his since service and devotion were rewarded by a vision in which the
virgin mary appeared to him and bestowed
upon him great philosophical and intellectual powers. having become master of the magical sciences, albertus began the construction of a
curious automaton, which he invested with the powers of speech and thought. the Android, as it was
called, was composed of metals and unknown substances chosen according to the stars and endued
with spiritual qualities by magical formulæ and invocations, and the labor upon it consumed over
thirty years. St. Thomas Aquinas, thinking the device to be a diabolical mechanism, destroyed it, thus
frustrating the labor of a lifetime. In spite of this act, Albertus Magnus left to St. Thomas Aquinas his
alchemical formulæ, including (according to legend) the secret of the Philosopher’s Stone.
On one occasion Albertus Magnus invited William II, Count of Holland and King of the Romans, to
a garden party in midwinter. the ground was covered with snow, but albertus, had prepare a sumptuous
banquet in the open grounds of his monastery at Cologne. The guests were amazed at the imprudence of the philosopher, but as they sat down to eat albertus, uttered a few words, the snow disappeared, the garden
was filled with flowers and singing birds, and the air was warm with the breezes of summer. As soon as the feast was over, the snow returned, much to the amazement of the assembled nobles. (For details, see The lives of alchemystical Philosophers.)
William and Mary jointly ascended the throne of England in 1689, at which time
alchemists must have abounded in the kingdom, for during the first year of their reign they repealed an Act made by King Henry IV in which that sovereign declared the multiplying of metals to be a crime against the crown. in Dr. sigismund bacstrom’s
Collection of Alchemical Manuscripts is a handwritten copy of the act passed by William and Mary, copied from Chapter 30 of Statutes at Large for the first year of their reign. the act reads as follows:
“An Act to repeal the Statute made in the 5th year of King Henry IV, late
king of England, [wherein] it was enacted, among other things, in these words,

468or to this effect, namely: ‘that none from henceforth should use to multiply
Gold or silver or use the craft of multiplication, and if any the same do they
shall incur the pain of felony.’ and whereas, since the making of the said statute, divers persons have by their study, industry and learning, arrived to great skill & perfection in the art of melting and refining of metals, and otherwise improving and multiplying them and their ores, which very much abound in this realm, and extracting gold and silver our of the same, but dare not to exer -
cise their said skill within this realm, for fear of falling under the penalty of the said statute, but exercise the said art in foreign parts, to the great loss and detri-ment of this realm: Be it therefore enacted by the King’s and Queen’s most ex-cellent majesties, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and
temporal and Commons in this present parliament assembled, that from hence-forth the aforesaid branch, article, or sentence, contained in the said act, and every word, matter and thing contained in the said branch or sentence, shall be repealed, annulled, revoked, and for ever made void, any thing in the said act to the contrary in any wise whatsoever notwithstanding. Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all the gold and silver that shall be extracted by the aforesaid art of melting or refining of metals, and otherwise improving and multiplying of them and their ores, as before set forth, be from henceforth employed for no other use or uses whatsoever but for the increase of monies; and that the place hereby appointed for the disposal thereof shall be their majesties mint, within the tower of london, at which place they are to receive the full and true value of their gold and silver, so procured, from time to time, according to the assay and fineness thereof, and so for any greater or less weight, and that none of that metal of gold and silver so refined and procured be permitted to be used or disposed of in any other place or places within their majesties dominions.”
after this repealing measure had become effective, William and mary encouraged
the further study of alchemy.
Dr. Franz Hartmann has collected reliable evidence concerning four different: alchemists who transmuted base metals into gold not once but many times. one of these
accounts concerns a monk of the Order of St. Augustine named Wenzel Seiler, who discovered a small amount of mysterious red powder in his convent. in the presence of
Emperor Leopold I, King of Germany, Hungary, and Bohemia, he transmuted quanti-ties of tin into gold. among other things which he dipped into his mysterious essence
was a large silver medal. that part of the medal which came in contact with the goldproducing substance was transmuted into the purest quality of the more precious metal. the rest remained silver. With regard to this medal, Dr. hartmann writes:
“The most indisputable proof (if appearances can prove anything) of the possibility of transmuting base metals into gold, may be seen by everyone who visits vienna; it being a medal preserved in the imperial treasury chamber, and it is

469stated that this medal, consisting originally of silver, has been partly transformed
into gold, by alchemical means, by the same Wenzel Seiler who was afterwards made a knight by the Emperor Leopold I. and given the title Wenzeslaus Ritter von Reinburg. “(In the Pronaos of the Temple of Wisdom.)
space limitations preclude a lengthy discussion of the alchemists. a brief sketch of
the lives of four should serve to show the general principles on which they worked, the method by which they obtained their knowledge, and the use which they made of it. these four were Grand masters of this secret science; and the stories of their wander -
ings and strivings, as recorded by their own pens and by contemporaneous disciples of the Hermetic art, are as fascinating as any romance of fiction.
PARACELSUS OF HOHENHEIM
the most famous of alchemical and hermetic philosophers was Philippus aureolus
theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim. this man, who called himself Paracelsus, declared that some day all the doctors of Europe would turn from the other schools and, following him, revere him above every other physician. the accepted date of the birth of
Paracelsus is December 17, 1493. He was an only child. Both his father and mother were interested in medicine and chemistry. his father was a physician and his mother the superintendent of a hospital. While still a youth, Paracelsus became greatly interested in the writings of isaac of holland, and determined to reform the medical science of his day.
When twenty years old he began a series of travels which continued for about twelve
years. he visited many European countries, including russia. it is possible that he penetrated into asia. it was in Constantinople that the great secret of the hermetic arts was
bestowed upon him by arabian adepts. his knowledge of the nature spirits and the inhabitants of the invisible worlds he probably secured from the brahmins of india with whom
he came in contact either directly or through their disciples. he became an army physician, and his understanding and skill brought him great success.
upon his return to Germany, he began his long-dreamed-of reformation of the medical
arts and sciences. He was opposed on every hand and criticized unmercifully. His vio-lent temper and tremendously strong personality undoubtedly precipitated many storms upon his head which might have been avoided had he been of a less caustic disposition. He flayed the apothecaries, asserting that they did not use the proper ingredients in their prescriptions and did not consider the needs of their patients, desiring only to collect ex-orbitant fees for their concoctions.
the remarkable cures which Paracelsus effected only made his enemies hate him more
bitterly, for they could not duplicate the apparent miracles which he wrought. he not only
treated the more common diseases of his day but is said to have actually cured leprosy, cholera, and cancer. his friends claimed for him that he all but raised the dead. his systems
of healing were so heterodox, however, that slowly but surely his enemies overwhelmed him and again and again forced him to leave the fields of his labors and seek refuge where he was not known.