American Indian
Symbolism
ThE north amEriCan inDian is by nature a symbolist, a mystic, and a
philosopher. like most: aboriginal peoples, his soul was en rapport with the
cosmic agencies manifesting about him. not only did his Manidos control creation from their exalted seats above the clouds, but they also descended into the world of
men and mingled with their red children. The gray clouds hanging over the horizon were the smoke from the calumets of the gods, who could build fires of petrified wood and use a
comet for a flame. The American Indian peopled the forests, rivers, and sky with myriads of superphysical and invisible beings. there are legends of entire tribes of indians who
lived in lake bottoms; of races who were never seen in the daytime but who, coming forth from their hidden caves, roamed the earth at night and waylaid unwary travelers; also of bat indians, with human bodies and batlike wings, who lived in gloomy forests and inaccessible cliffs and who slept hanging head downward from great branches and outcrop-pings of rock. the red man’s philosophy of elemental creatures is apparently the outcome
of his intimate contact with nature, whose inexplicable wonders become the generating
cause of such metaphysical speculations.
in common with the early scandinavians, the indians of north america considered
the earth (the Great Mother) to be an intermediate plane, bounded above by a heavenly sphere (the dwelling place of the Great Spirit) and below by a dark and terrifying subter -
ranean world (the abode of shadows and of submundane powers). Like the Chaldeans, they divided the interval between the surface of earth and heaven into various strata, one consisting of clouds, another of the paths of the heavenly bodies, and so on. the under -
world was similarly divided and like the Greek system represented to the initiated the house of the lesser mysteries. those creatures capable of functioning in two or more
elements were considered as messengers between the spirits of these various planes. the
abode of the dead was presumed to be in a distant place: in the heavens above, the earth below, the distant corners of the world, or across wide seas. Sometimes a river flows between the world of the dead and that of the living, in this respect paralleling Egyptian, Greek, and Christian theology. to the indian the number four has a peculiar sanctity,
presumably because the Great Spirit created His universe in a square frame. This is sug-gestive of the veneration accorded the tetrad by the Pythagoreans, who held it to be a fitting symbol of the Creator. the legendary narratives of the strange adventures of intrepid
heroes who while in the physical body penetrated the realms of the dead prove beyond question the presence of Mystery cults among the North American red men. Wherever the Mysteries were established they were recognized as the philosophic equivalents of death, for those passing through the rituals experienced all after-death conditions while

640still in the physical body. at the consummation of the ritual the initiate actually gained
the ability to pass in and out of his physical body at will. this is the philosophic foundation for the allegories of adventures in the indian shadow land, or World of Ghosts.
“From coast to coast,” writes Hartley Burr Alexander, “the sacred Calumet is
the Indian’s altar, and its smoke is the proper offering to Heaven.” (See Mythology
of All Paces .)
in the Notes on the same work is given the following description of the pipe ceremony:
“The master of ceremonies, again rising to his feet, filled and lighted the pipe of
peace from his own fire. Drawing three whiffs, one after the other, he blew the first
towards the zenith, the second towards the ground, and the third towards the Sun. By the first act he returned thanks to the Great Spirit for the preservation of his life during the past year, and for being permitted to be present at this council. by the
second, he returned thanks to his mother, the Earth, for her various productions
which had ministered to his sustenance. and by the third, he returned thanks to the
sun for his never-failing light, ever shining upon all.”
it was necessary for the indian to secure the red stone for his calumet from the pipestone quarry where in some remote past the Great Spirit had come and, after fashioning with his own hands a great pipe, had smoked it toward the four corners of creation and
thus instituted this most sacred ceremony. scores of indian tribes – some of them traveling
thousands of miles – secured the sacred stone from this single quarry, where the mandate of the Great spirit had decreed that eternal peace should reign.
the indian does not worship the sun; he rather regards this shining orb as an appropriate symbol of the Great and Good spirit who forever radiates life to his red children. in
indian symbolism the serpent – especially the Great serpent – corroborates other evidence
pointing to the presence of the Mysteries on the North American Continent. The flying serpent is the atlantean token of the initiate; the seven-headed snake represents the seven
great Atlantean islands (the cities of Chibola?) and also the seven great prehistoric schools of esoteric philosophy. moreover, who can doubt the presence of the secret doctrine in the
Americas when he gazes upon the great serpent mound in Adams County, Ohio, where the huge reptile is represented as disgorging the Egg of Existence? many american indian
tribes are reincarnationists, some are transmigrationists. they even called their children by
the names supposed to have been borne by them in a former life. there is an account of an
instance where a parent by inadvertence had given his infant the wrong name, whereupon the babe cried incessantly until the mistake had been rectified! The belief in reincarnation is also prevalent among the Eskimos. Aged Eskimos not infrequently kill themselves in order to reincarnate in the family of some newly married loved one.
The American Indians recognize the difference between the ghost and the actual soul of
a dead person, a knowledge restricted to initiates of the mysteries. in common with the Platonists they also understood the principles of an archetypal sphere wherein exist the patterns

641of all forms manifesting in the earth plane, the theory of Group, or Elder, souls having supervision over the animal species is also shared by them. the red man’s belief in guardian
spirits would have warmed the heart of Paracelsus. When they attain the importance of being
protectors of entire clans or tribes, these guardians are called totems. in some tribes impressive ceremonies mark the occasion when the young men are sent out into the forest to fast and pray and there remain until their guardian spirit manifests to them. Whatever creature appears thereupon becomes their peculiar genius, to whom they appeal in time of trouble.
NA V AHO SAND PAINTING.
From an original drawing
by Hasteen Klah.
the navaho dry or sand paintings are made by sprinkling
varicolored ground pigment upon
a base of smooth sand. the one
here reproduced is encircled
by the rainbow goddess, and
portrays an episode from the
navaho cosmogony myth. according to Hasteen Klah, the Navaho sand priest who designed
this painting, the navahos do not
believe in idolatry, hence they
make no images of their gods,
but perpetuate only the mental
concept of them. Just as the gods
draw pictures upon the moving
clouds, so the priests make paintings on the sand, and when the purpose of the drawing has been fulfilled it is effaced by a sweep of
the hand. according to this informant, the Zuni, hopi, and navaho nations had a common genesis;
they all came out of the earth and then separated into three nations.
The Navahos first emerged about 3,000 years ago at a point now called La Platte Mountain in Colorado.
the four mountains sacred to the navahos are la Platte mountain, mount taylor, navaho mountain, and
San Francisco Mountain. While these three nations were under the earth four mountain ranges were below with them. the eastern mountains were white, the southern blue, the western yellow, and the northern black.
the rise and fall of these mountains caused the alternation of day and night. When the white mountains rose it was day under the earth; when the yellow ones rose, twilight; the black mountains brought night, and the blue, dawn. Seven major deities were recognized by the Navahos, but Hasteen Klah was unable to say whether the indians related these deities to the planets. bakochiddy, one of these seven major gods, was
white in color with light reddish hair and gray eyes. his father was the sun ray and his mother the daylight.
he ascended to heaven and in some respects his life parallels that of Christ. to avenge the kidnapping of
his child, Kahothsode, a fish god, caused a great flood to arise. To escape destruction, the Zunis, Hopis, and navahos ascended to the surface of the earth.
the sand painting here reproduced is part of the medicine series prepared far the healing of disease. in
the healing ceremony the patient is placed upon the drawing, which is made in a consecrated hogan, and all outsiders excluded. the sacred swastika in the center of the drawing is perhaps the most nearly universal of
religious emblems and represents the four corners of the world. the two hunchback god, at the right and left
assume their appearance by reason of the great clouds borne upon their backs. in navaho religious art, male
divinities are always shown with circular heads and female divinities with square heads.

642the outstanding hero of north american indian folklore is hiawatha, a name which,
according to Lewis Spence, signifies “he who seeks the wampum-belt.” Hiawatha enjoys
the distinction of anticipating by several centuries the late Woodrow Wilson’s cherished dream of a League of Nations. Following in the footsteps of Schoolcraft, Longfellow confused the historical Hiawatha of the Iroquois with Manabozho, a mythological hero of the Algonquins and Ojibwas. Hiawatha, a chief of the Iroquois, after many reverses and disappointments, succeeded in uniting the five great nations of the Iroquois into the “League of the Five Nations.” The original purpose of the league – to abolish war by sub-stituting councils of arbitration – was not wholly successful, but the power of the “silver Chain” conferred upon the Iroquois a solidarity attained by no other confederacy of North american indians. hiawatha, however, met the same opposition which has confronted every great idealist, irrespective of time or race. the shamans turned their magic against him
and, according to one legend, created an evil bird which, swooping down from heaven, tore his only daughter to pieces before his eyes. When hiawatha, after accomplishing
his mission, had sailed away in his self-propelled canoe along the path of the sunset, his people realized the true greatness of their benefactor and elevated him to the dignity of a demigod. in longfellow’s Song of Hiawatha the poet has cast the great indian statesman
in a charming setting of magic and enchantment; yet through the maze of symbol and al-legory is ever faintly visible the figure of Hiawatha the initiate – the very personification of the red man and his philosophy.
THE POPOL VUH
no other sacred book sets forth so completely as the Popol Vuh the initiatory rituals of
a great school of mystical philosophy. This volume alone is sufficient to establish incon-testably the philosophical excellence of the red race.
“The Red ‘Children of the Sun’,” writes James Morgan Pryse, “do not wor -
ship the One God. For them that One God is absolutely impersonal, and all the Forces emanated from that One God are personal. This is the exact reverse of the popular western conception of a personal God and impersonal work-ing forces in nature. Decide for yourself which of these beliefs is the more philosophical. These Children of the Sun adore the Plumèd Serpent, who is the messenger of the Sun. He was the God Quetzalcoatl in Mexico, Gucumatz in Quiché; and in Peru he was called Amaru. From the latter name comes our word america. Amaruca is, literally translated, ‘Land of the Plumèd Serpent.’
the priests of this God of Peace, from their chief centre in the Cordilleras, once ruled both americas. all the red men who have remained true to the
ancient religion are still under their sway. one of their strong centres was in
Guatemala, and of their order was the author of the book called Popol Vuh.
In the Quiché tongue Gucumatz is the exact equivalent of Quetzalcoatl in the nahuatl language; quetzal, the bird of Paradise; coatl, serpent – ‘the serpent
veiled in plumes of the paradise-bird’!”