The Mystery of
the Apocalypse
ThE PRESENCE OF THE TEMPLE of Diana at Ephesus marked that city as
sacred to the mystery religion, for the seven Wonders of the ancient world
were erected to indicate the repositories of recondite knowledge. of Ephesus,
h. P. blavatsky writes:
“it was a focus of the universal ‘secret’ doctrines; the weird laboratory whence,
fashioned in elegant Grecian phraseology, sprang the quintessence of Buddhistic,
Zoroastrian, and Chaldean philosophy. artemis, the gigantic concrete symbol of
theosophico-pantheistic abstractions, the great mother multimamma, androgyne
and patroness of the ‘Ephesian writings,’ was conquered by Paul; but although the zealous converts of the apostles pretended to burn all their books on ‘curious arts, τα περιεργα, enough of these remained for them to study when their first zeal had cooled off.” (See Isis Unveiled.)
being a great center of pagan learning, Ephesus has been the locale for many early
Christian myths. the assertion has been made that it was the last domicile of the virgin
Mary; also that the tomb of St. John the Divine was located there. According to legend,
St. John did not depart from this life in the usual manner but, selecting his vault, entered it while still alive, and closing the entrance behind him, vanished forever from mortal sight. A rumor was current in ancient Ephesus that St. John would sleep in his tomb until the return of the savior, and that when the apostle turned over on his sepulchral couch the
earth above moved like the coverlets of a bed.
subjected to more criticism than any other book now incorporated in the new testament, the Apocalypse – popularly accredited to St. John the Divine – is by far the most important but least understood of the Gnostic Christian writings. Though Justin Martyr declared the Book of Revelation to have been written by “John, one of Christ’s apostles,” its authorship was disputed as early as the second century after Christ. in the third century
these contentions became acute and even Dionysius of alexandria and Eusebius attacked
the Johannine theory, declaring that both the Book of Revelation and the Gospel accord -
ing to St. John were written by one Cerinthus, who borrowed the name of the great apostle the better to foist his own doctrines upon the Christians. Later Jerome questioned the authorship of the apocalypse and during the reformation his objections were revived by
luther and Erasmus. the once generally accepted notion that the book of revelation was
the actual record of a “mystical experience” occurring to St. John while that seer was an exile in the isle of Parmos is now regarded with disfavor by more critical scholars. other

617explanations have therefore been advanced to account for the symbolism permeating the
volume and the original motive for its writing. the more reasonable of these theories may
be summed up as follows:
First, upon the weight of evidence furnished by its own contents the Book of Revela -
tion may well be pronounced a pagan writing – one of the sacred books of the Eleusinian or Phrygian mysteries. as a corollary, the real author of a work setting forth the profundities of Egyptian and Greek mysticism must have been an initiate himself and consequently obligated to write only in the symbolic language of the mysteries.
second, it is possible that the book of revelation was written to reconcile the seeming discrepancies between the early Christian and pagan religious philosophies. When the zealots of the primitive Christian Church sought to Christianize pagandom, the pagan initiates retorted with a powerful effort to paganize Christianity. The Christians failed but the pagans succeeded. With the decline of paganism the initiated pagan hierophants transferred their base of operations to the new vehicle of primitive Christianity, adopting the symbols of the new cult to conceal those eternal verities which are ever the priceless possession of the wise. the apocalypse shows clearly the resultant fusion of pagan and
Christian symbolism and thus bears irrefutable evidence of the activities of these initiated minds operating through early Christianity.
third, the theory has been advanced that the book of revelation represents the attempt made by the unscrupulous members of a certain religious order to undermine the Christian Mysteries by satirizing their philosophy. This nefarious end they hoped to attain by showing the new faith to be merely a restatement of the ancient pagan doctrines, by heaping ridicule upon Christianity, and by using its own symbols toward its disparage-ment. For example, the star which fell to earth (Rev. viii. 10-11) could be construed to mean the Star of Bethlehem, and the bitterness of that star (called Wormwood and which poisoned mankind) could signify the “false” teachings of the Christian Church. While the last theory has gained a certain measure of popularity, the profundity of the apocalypse
leads the discerning reader to the inevitable conclusion that this is the least plausible of the three hypotheses. to those able to pierce the veil of its symbolism, the inspired source
of the document requires no further corroborative evidence.
In the final analysis, true philosophy can be limited by neither creed nor faction; in fact
it is incompatible with every artificial limitation of human thought. The question of the pagan or Christian origin of the Book of Revelation is, consequently, of little importance. The intrinsic value of the book lies in its magnificent epitome of the Universal Mystery – an observation which led St. Jerome to declare that it is susceptible of seven entirely different interpretations. untrained in the reaches of ancient thought, the modem theologian cannot
possibly cope with the complexities of the apocalypse, for to him this mystic writing is but
a phantasmagoria the divine inspiration of which he is sorely tempted to question. In the limited space here available it is possible to sketch but briefly a few of the salient features of the vision of the seer of Patmos. a careful consideration of the various pagan mysteries will
assist materially also in filling the inevitable gaps in this abridgment.
In the opening chapter of the Apocalypse, St. John describes the Alpha and Omega
who stood in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. Surrounded by his flaming

618planetary regents, this Sublime One thus epitomizes in one impressive and mysterious
figure the entire sweep of humanity’s evolutionary growth – past, present, and future.
“The first stages of man’s earthly development,” writes Dr. Rudolph Steiner,
“ran their course at a period when the earth was still ‘fiery’; and the first human incarnations were formed out of the element of fire; at the end of his earthly career man will himself radiate his inner being outwards creatively by the force of the element of fire. This continuous development from the beginning to the end of the earth reveals itself to the ‘seer,’ when he sees on the astral plane the archetype of evolving man. (...) The beginning of earthly evolution stands forth in the fiery feet, its end in the fiery countenance, and the complete power of the ‘creative word,’ to be finally won, is seen in the fiery source coming out of the mouth.” (See Occult
Seals and Columns.)
THE THRONE OF GODAND OF THE LAMB.From Jacob Behmen’s Works.
before the throne of God was the crystal sea
representing the schamayim, or the living waters which are above the heavens. before the throne also were four creatures – a bull, a lion, an eagle, and a man. these represented the four corners
of creation and the multitude of eyes with which they were covered are the stars of the firmament. The twenty-four elders have the same signifi -
cance as the priests gathered around the statue of Ceres in the Greater Eleusinian rite and also the Persian Genii, or gods of the hours of the day, who, casting away their crowns, glorify the holy one. as symbolic of the divisions of time, the
elders adore the timeless and enduring spirit in the midst of them.
In his Restored New Testament, James Morgan Pryse traces the relationship of the var -
ious parts of the Alpha and Omega to the seven sacred planets of the ancients. To quote:
“The Logos-figure described is a composite picture of the seven sacred planets: he has the snowy-white hair of Kronos (‘Father Time’), the blazing eyes of ‘wide-seeing’ Zeus, the sword of arcs, the shining face of helios, and the chiton
and girdle of aphrodite; his feet are of mercury, the metal sacred to hermes, and
his voice is like the murmur of the ocean’s waves (the ‘many waters’), alluding to selene, the moon-Goddess of the four seasons and of the waters.”

619the seven stars carried by this immense being in his right hand are the Governors
of the world; the flaming sword issuing from his mouth is the Creative Fiat, or Word of
Power, by which the illusion of material permanence is slain. here also is represented, in
all his symbolic splendor, the hierophant of the Phrygian mysteries, his various insignia
emblematic of his divine attributes. seven priests bearing lamps are his attendants and the
stars carried in his hand are the seven schools of the mysteries whose power he administers. as one born again out of spiritual darkness, into perfect wisdom, this archimagus
is made to say: “i am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, i am alive forever more,
amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.”
In the second and third chapters St. John delivers to the “seven churches which are
in asia” the injunctions received by him from the alpha and omega. the churches are
here analogous to the rungs of a Mithraic ladder, and John, being “in the spirit,” ascended
through the orbits of the seven sacred planets until he reached the inner surface of the Empyrean.
“after the soul of the prophet,” writes the anonymous author of Mankind: Their
Origin and Destiny , “in his ecstatic state has passed in its rapid flight through the
seven spheres, from the sphere of the moon to that of saturn, or from the planet
which corresponds to Cancer, the gate of men, to that of Capricorn, which is the gate of the gods, a new gate opens to him in the highest heaven, and in the zodiac, beneath which the seven planets revolve; in a word, in the firmament, or that which the ancients called crystallinum primum, or the crystal heaven.”
When related to the Eastern system of metaphysics, these churches represent the
chakras, or nerve ganglia, along the human spine, the “door in heaven” being the brahmarandra, or point in the crown of the skull (Golgotha), through which the spinal spirit fire passes to liberation. The church of Ephesus corresponds to the muladhara, or sacral
ganglion, and the other churches to the higher ganglia according to the order given in revelation. Dr. steiner discovers a relationship between the seven churches and the divisions of the aryan race. thus, the church of Ephesus stands for the arch-indian branch;
the church of smyrna, the arch-Persians; the church of Pergamos, the Chaldean-Egyptian-semitic; the church of thyatira, the Grecian-latin-roman; the church of sardis, the
teuton-anglo-saxon; the church of Philadelphia, the slavic; and the church of laodicea,
the Manichæan. The seven churches also signify the Greek vowels, of which Alpha and
Omega are the first and the last. A difference of opinion exists as to the order in which the seven planers should be related to the churches. some proceed from the hypothesis
that saturn represents the church of Ephesus; but from the fact that this city was sacred to
the moon goddess and also that the sphere of the moon is the first above that of the earth, the planets obviously should ascend in their ancient order from the moon to Saturn. From saturn the soul would naturally ascend through the door in the Empyrean.
In the fourth and fifth chapters St. John describes the throne of God upon which sat the
holy one “which was and is, and is to come.” about the throne were twenty-four lesser seats
upon which sat twenty-four elders arrayed in white garments and wearing crowns of gold.