Bacon, Shakspere,
and the Rosicrucians
ThE PrEsEnt ConsiDEration of the bacon – shakspere – rosicrucian
controversy is undertaken not for the vain purpose of digging up dead men’s
bones but rather in the hope that a critical analysis will aid in the rediscovery
of that knowledge lost to the world since the oracles were silenced. It was W. F. C. Wigs-ton who called the bard of avon “phantom Captain shakespeare, the rosicrucian mask.”
This constitutes one of the most significant statements relating to the Bacon-Shakspere controversy.
It is quite evident that William Shakspere could not, unaided, have produced the immortal writings bearing his name. he did not possess the necessary literary culture, for the
town of stratford where he was reared contained no school capable of imparting the higher
forms of learning reflected in the writings ascribed to him. His parents were illiterate, and in his early life he evinced a total disregard for study. there are in existence but six known
examples of shakspere’s handwriting. all are signatures, and three of them are in his will.
the scrawling, uncertain method of their execution stamps shakspere as unfamiliar with
the use of a pen, and it is obvious either that he copied a signature prepared for him or that his hand was guided while he wrote. no autograph manuscripts of the “shakespearian”
plays or sonnets have been discovered, nor is there even a tradition concerning them other than the fantastic and impossible statement appearing in the foreword of the Great Folio .
A well-stocked library would be an essential part of the equipment of an author whose
literary productions demonstrate him to be familiar with the literature of all ages, yet there is no record that shakspere ever possessed a library, nor does he make any mention
of books in his will. Commenting on the known illiteracy of Shakspere’s daughter Ju-dith, who at twenty-seven could only make her mark, ignatius Donnelly declares it to be
unbelievable that William shakspere if he wrote the plays bearing his name would have
permitted his own daughter to reach womanhood and marry without being able to read one line of the writings that made her father wealthy and locally famous.
The query also has been raised, “Where did William Shakspere secure his knowledge of
modern French, Italian, Spanish, and Danish, to say nothing of classical Latin and Greek?” For, in spite of the rare discrimination with which Latin is used by the author of the Shake-spearian plays, Ben Jonson, who knew Shakspere intimately, declared that the Stratford ac-tor understood “small l atin and less Greek”! i s it not also more than strange that no record
exists of William shakspere’s having ever played a leading rôle in the famous dramas he is
supposed to have written or in others produced by the company of which he was a member? true, he may have owned a small interest in the Globe theatre or blackfriars, but apparently
the height of his thespian achievements was the Ghost in Hamlet!

551in spite of his admitted avarice, shakspere seemingly made no effort during his
lifetime to control or secure remuneration from the plays bearing his name, many of
which were first published anonymously. As far as can be ascertained, none of his heirs were involved in any manner whatsoever in the printing of the First Folio after his
death, nor did they benefit financially therefrom. Had he been their author, Shakspere’s manuscripts and unpublished plays would certainly have constituted his most valued possessions, yet his will – while making special disposition of his second-best bed and his “broad silver gilt bowl” neither mentions nor intimates that he possessed any literary productions whatsoever.
While the Folios and Quartos usually are signed “William Shakespeare,” all
the known autographs of the stratford actor read “William shakspere.” Does this
change in spelling contain any significance heretofore generally overlooked? Fur -
thermore, if the publishers of the First Shakespearian Folio revered their fellow
actor as much as their claims in that volume would indicate, why did they, as if in ironical allusion to a hoax which they were perpetrating, place an evident caricature of him on the title page?
Certain absurdities also in shakspere’s private life are irreconcilable. While supposedly at the zenith of his literary career, he was actually engaged in buying malt, presumably for a brewing business! also picture the immortal shakspere – the reputed
author of The Merchant of Venice – as a moneylender! Yet among those against whom
shakspere brought action to collect petty sums was a fellow townsman – one Philip
rogers – whom he sued for an unpaid loan of two shillings, or about forty-eight cents!
in short, there is nothing known in the life of shakspere that would justify the literary
excellence imputed to him.
the philosophic ideals promulgated throughout the shakespearian plays distinctly
demonstrate their author to have been thoroughly familiar with certain doctrines and te-nets peculiar to rosicrucianism; in fact the profundity of the shakespearian productions
stamps their creator as one of the illuminati of the ages. most of those seeking a solution for the bacon- shakspere controversy have been intellectualists. notwithstanding
their scholarly attainments, they have overlooked the important part played by transcen-dentalism in the philosophic achievements of the ages. the mysteries of superphysics
are inexplicable to the materialist, whose training does not equip him to estimate the extent of their ramifications and complexities. Yet who but a Platonist, a Qabbalist, or a Pythagorean could have written The Tempest, Macbeth, Hamlet, or The Tragedy of
Cymbeline? Who but one deeply versed in Paracelsian lore could have conceived, A
Midsummer Night’ s Dream?
Father of modern science, remodeler of modern law, editor of the modem Bible, patron of modem democracy, and one of the founders of modern Freemasonry, Sir Francis bacon was a man of many aims and purposes. he was a rosicrucian, some have intimated
the Rosicrucian. If not actually the Illustrious Father C.R.C. referred to in the Rosicru-cian manifestoes, he was certainly a high initiate of the rosicrucian order, and it is his
activities in connection with this secret body that are of prime importance to students of symbolism, philosophy, and literature.

HEADPIECE SHOWING
LIGHT AND SHADED A’s.From Shakespeare’s King Richard The Second, Quarto of 1597.
the ornamental headpiece shown above
has long been considered a baconian or
rosicrucian signature. the light and the dark A ’s appear in several volumes published by emissaries
of the Rosicrucians. If the above figure be compared with that from the Alciati Emblemata on the following pages, the cryptic use of the two a’s will be further demonstrated.
THE TITLE PAGE OF BURTON’S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY.From Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy .
baconian experts declare burton’s anatomy of Melancholy to be in reality Francis bacon’s scrapbook in which he gathered
strange and rare bits of knowledge during the many years of eventful life. this title
page has long been supposed to contain a cryptic message. the key to this cipher
is the pointing figure of the maniac in the lower right-hand corner of the de-sign. According to Mrs. Elizabeth Wells Gallup, the celestial globe at which the maniac is pointing is a cryptic symbol of Sir Francis Bacon. The planetary signs which appear in the clouds opposite the marginal figures 4, 5;, 6, and 7 signify the planetary configurations, which produce the forms of mania depicted. the seated
man, with his head resting upon his hand. is declared by baconian enthusiasts to
represent Sir Francis Bacon.
Scores of volumes have been written to establish Sir Francis Bacon as the real author
of the plays and sonnets popularly ascribed to William shakspere. an impartial consideration of these documents cannot but convince the open-minded of the verisimilitude of the baconian theory. in fact those enthusiasts who for years have struggled to identify sir
Francis Bacon as the true “Bard of Avon” might long since have won their case had they

553emphasized its most important angle, namely, that Sir Francis Bacon, the Rosicrucian
initiate, wrote into the Shakespearian plays the secret teachings of the Fraternity of R.C. and the true rituals of the Freemasonic Order, of which order it may yet be discovered that he was the actual founder. a sentimental world, however, dislikes to give up a traditional
hero, either to solve a controversy or to right a wrong. nevertheless, if it can be proved
that by raveling out the riddle there can be discovered information of practical value to mankind, then the best minds of the world will cooperate in the enterprise. the baconShakspere controversy, as its most able advocates realize, involves the most profound aspects of science, religion, and ethics; he who solves its mystery may yet find therein the key to the supposedly lost wisdom of antiquity.
It was in recognition of Bacon’s intellectual accomplishments that King James turned
over to him the translators’ manuscripts of what is now known as the King James Bible for the presumable purpose of checking, editing, and revising them. the documents remained
in his hands for nearly a year, but no information is to be had concerning what occurred in that time. regarding this work, William t. smedley writes:
“ it will eventually be proved that the whole scheme of the authorised version
of the Bible was Francis Bacon’s.” (See The Mystery of Francis Bacon .)
The first edition of the King James Bible contains a cryptic Baconian headpiece. Did
Bacon cryptographically conceal in the Authorized Bible that which he dared not literally reveal in the text – the secret rosicrucian key to mystic and masonic Christianity?
Sir Francis Bacon unquestionably possessed the range of general and philosophical
knowledge necessary to write the shakespearian plays and sonnets, for it is usually conceded that he was a composer, lawyer, and linguist. his chaplain, Doctor William rawley,
and Ben Jonson both attest his philosophic and poetic accomplishments. The former pays bacon this remarkable tribute:
“i have been enduced to think that if there were a beame of knowledge derived from God upon any man in these modern times, it was upon him. For though he was a great reader of books; yet he had not his knowledge from books but from some grounds and notions from within himself. “ (See Introduction to the Resuscitado.)
Sir Francis Bacon, being not only an able barrister but also a polished courtier, also
possessed that intimate knowledge of parliamentary law and the etiquette of the royal court revealed in the Shakespearian plays which could scarcely have been acquired by a man in the humble station of the stratford actor. lord verulam furthermore visited many
of the foreign countries forming the background for the plays and was therefore in a posi-tion to create the authentic local atmosphere contained therein, but there is no record of William shakspere’s ever having traveled outside of England.
The magnificent library amassed by Sir Francis Bacon contained the very volumes
necessary to supply the quotations and anecdotes incorporated into the Shakespearian