The Bembine Table of Isis
AmanusCriPt bY thomas taYlor contains the following remarkable
paragraph:
“Plato was initiated into the ‘Greater Mysteries’ at the age of 49. The initiation took place in one of the subterranean halls of the Great Pyramid in Egypt.
the isia C tabl E formed the altar, before which the Divine Plato stood and
received that which was always his, but which the ceremony of the mysteries
enkindled and brought from its dormant state. With this ascent, after three days in the Great Hall, he was received by the Hierophant of the Pyramid (the Hiero-phant was seen only by those who had passed the three days, the three degrees, the three dimensions) and given verbally the highest Esoteric teachings, each
accompanied with its appropriate symbol. after a further three months’ sojourn
in the halls of the Pyramid, the initiate Plato was sent out into the world to do the
work of the Great order, as Pythagoras and orpheus had been before him.”
Before the sacking of Rome in 1527 there is no historical mention of the Mensa Isiaca,
(Tablet of Isis). At that time the Tablet came into the possession of a certain locksmith or ironworker, who sold it at an exorbitant price to Cardinal Bembo, a celebrated antiquary, historiographer of the republic of venice, and afterwards librarian of st. mark’s. after his
death in 1547 the Isiac Tablet was acquired by the House of Mantua, in whose museum it remained until 1630, when troops of Ferdinand II captured the city of Mantua. Several early writers on the subject have assumed that the tablet was demolished by the ignorant soldiery
for the silver it contained. the assumption, however, was erroneous. the tablet fell into
the hands of Cardinal Pava, who presented it to the Duke of savoy, who in turn presented
it to the King of Sardinia. When the French conquered Italy in 1797 the Tablet was carried to Paris. In 1809, Alexandre Lenoir, writing of the Mensa Isiaca, said it was on exhibition
at the Bibliothèque Nationale. Upon the establishment of peace between the two countries it was returned to Italy. In his Guide to Northern Italy, Karl Baedeker describes the Mensa
Isiaca as being in the center of Gallery 2 in the Museum of Antiquities at Turin.
A faithful reproduction of the original Tablet was made in 1559 by the celebrated Æneas
vicus of Parma, and a copy of the engraving was given by the Chancellor of the Duke of
Bavaria to the Museum of Hieroglyphics. Athanasius Kircher describes the Tablet as “five palms long and four wide.” W. Wynn Westcott says it measures 50 by 30 inches. It was made of bronze and decorated with encaustic or smalt enamel and silver inlay. Fosbroke adds:
“The figures are cut very shallow, and the contour of most of them is encircled
by threads of silver. The bases upon which the figures were seated or reclined,

161and left blank in the prints, were of silver and are torn away.” (See Encyclopædia
of Antiquities.)
THE BEMBINE TABLE OF ISIS.
Concerning the theurgic or magic sense in which the Egyptian priests exhibited in the bembine table
of Isis the philosophy of sacrifice, rites, and ceremonies by a system of occult symbols, Athanasius Kircher
writes:
“the early priests believed that a great spiritual power was invoked by correct and unabridged
sacrificial ceremonies. If one feature were lacking, the whole was vitiated, says Iamblichus. Hence they were most careful in all details, for they considered it absolutely essential for the entire chain of logical connections to be exactly according to ritual. Certainly for no other reason did they pre-pare and prescribe for future use the manuals, as it were, for conducting the rites. they learned,
too, what the first hieromancers – possessed, as it were, by a divine fury – devised as a system of symbolism for exhibiting their mysteries. these they placed in this tablet of isis, before the eyes
of those admitted to the sanctum sanctorum in order to teach the nature of the Gods and the pre-scribed forms of sacrifice. Since each of the orders of Gods had its own peculiar symbols, gestures, costumes, and ornaments, they thought it necessary to observe these in the whole apparatus of wor-ship, as nothing was more efficacious in drawing the benign attention of the deities and genii. (...) thus their temples, remote from the usual haunts of men, contained representations of nearly every form in nature. First, in the pavement, they symbolized the physical economy of the world, using minerals, stones and other things suitable for ornaments, including little streams of water. the walls
showed the starry world, and the done the world of genii. in the center was the altar, to suggest the

162emanations of the supreme mind from its center. thus the entire interior constituted a picture of
the Universe of Worlds. The priests in making sacrifices wore raiment adorned with figures similar
to those attributed to the Gods. their bodies were partially bare like those of the deities, and they
themselves were divested of all material cares and practices the strictest chastity. (...) Their heads were veiled to indicate their charge of earthly things. their heads and bodies were shaved, for they
regarded hair as a useless excrescence. upon the head they bore the same insignia as those attributed to the Gods. thus arrayed, they regarded themselves to be transformed into that intelligence
with which they constantly desired to be identified. For example, in order to call down to the world the soul and spirit of the universe, they stood before the image shown in the center of our tablet,
wearing the same symbols as that figure and its attendants, and offered sacrifices. By these and the accompanying singing of hymns they believed that they infallibly drew the God’s attention to their prayer. and so they did in regard to other regions of the tablet, believing of necessity the proper
ritual properly carried out would evoke the deity desired. that this was the origin of the science
of oracles is apparent. as a touched chord produces a harmony of sound, likewise the adjoining
chords respond though not touched. similarly the idea they expressed by their concurrent acts while
adoring the God came into accord with basic idea and, by an intellectual union, it was returned to
them deiformed, and they thus obtained the idea of ideas. hence there sprang up in their souls, they
thought, the gift of prophecy and divination, and they believed they could foretell future events, impending evils, etc. For as in the Supreme Mind everything is simultaneous and spaceless, the future is therefore present in that mind; and they thought that while the human mind was absorbed
in the supreme by contemplation, by that union they were enabled to know all the future. nearly
all that is represented in our tablet consists of amulets which, by analogy above described, would
inspire them, under the described conditions, with the virtues of the supreme Power and enable
them to receive good and avert evil. they also believed they could in this magical manner effect
cures of diseases; that genii could be induced to appear to them during sleep and cure or teach them to cure the sick. In this belief they consulted the Gods about all sort of doubts and difficulties, while adorned with the simulacra of the mystic rite and intently contemplating the Divine ideas;
and while so enraptured they believed the God by some sign, nod or gesture communicated with them, whether asleep or awake, concerning the truth or falsity of the matter in point.” (See Œdipus
Ægyptiacus.)
Those familiar with the fundamental principles of Hermetic philosophy will recognize
in the Mensa Isiaca the key to Chaldean, Egyptian, and Greek theology. in his Antiquities ,
the learned Benedictine, Father Montfaucon, admits his inability to cope with the intri -
cacies of its symbolism. he therefore doubts that the emblems upon the tablet possess
any significance worthy of consideration and ridicules Kircher, declaring him to be more obscure than the tablet itself. laurentius Pignorius reproduced the tablet in connection
with a descriptive essay in 1605, but his timidly advanced explanations demonstrated his ignorance concerning the actual interpretation of the figures.
in his Œdipus Ægyptiacus, published in 1654, Kircher attacked the problem with
characteristic avidity. Being peculiarly qualified for such a task by years of research in matters pertaining to the secret doctrines of antiquity, and with the assistance of a group of eminent scholars, Kircher accomplished much towards an exposition of the mysteries of the tablet. the master secret, however, eluded even him, as Eliphas levi has shrewdly
noted in his History of Magic.
“The learned Jesuit,” writes Levi, “divined that it contained the hieroglyphic key to
sacred alphabets, though he was unable to develop the explanation. it is divided into
three equal compartments; above are the twelve houses of heaven and below are the cor -

163responding distributions of labor [work periods] throughout the year, while in the middle
place are twenty-one sacred signs answering to the letters of the alphabet. in the midst
of all is a seated figure of the pantomorphic IYNX, emblem of universal being and cor -
responding as such to the hebrew Yod, or to that unique letter from which all the other
letters were formed. the iYnX is encircled by the ophite triad, answering to the three
mother letters of the Egyptian and hebrew alphabets. on the right are the ibimorphic
and serapian triads; on the left are those of nepthys and hecate, representing active and
passive, fixed and volatile, fructifying fire and generating water. Each pair of triads in conjunction with the center produces a septenary, and a septenary is contained in the cen-ter. the three septenaries furnish the absolute number of the three worlds, as well as the
complete number of primitive letters, to which a complementary sign is added, like zero to the nine numerals.”
LEVI’S KEY TO THE BEMBINE TABLE.
From Levi’s History of Magic.
“The Isiac Tablet, writes Levi, is a Key to the Ancient Book of Thoth, which has survived to
some extent the lapse of centuries and is pictured to us in the still comparatively ancient set of tarocchi Cards. to him the book of thoth was a résumé of the esoteric learning of the Egyptians, after
the decadence of their civilization, this lore became crystallized in a hieroglyphic form as the Tarot; this tarot having become partially or entirely forgotten or misunderstood, its pictured symbols fell
into the hands of the sham diviners, and of the providers of the public amusement by games of Cards. The modem Tarot, or Tarocchi pack of cards consists of 78 cards, of which 22 form a special group of trumps, of pictorial design: the remaining 56 are composed of four suits of 10 numerals and four court cards, King, Queen, Knight, and Knave or Valet; the suits are Swords (Militaryism), Cups (Sacerdocy), Clubs or Wands (Agriculture), and Shekels or Coins (Commerce), answering