CEREMONIAL MAGIC
AND SORCERY
CErEmonial maGiC is thE anCiEnt art of invoking and controlling
spirits by a scientific application of certain formulæ. A magician, enveloped in
sanctified vestments and carrying a wand inscribed with hieroglyphic figures,
could by the power vested in certain words and symbols control the invisible inhabitants of the elements and of the astral world. While the elaborate ceremonial magic of antiquity was not necessarily evil, there arose from its perversion several false schools of sorcery, or black magic .
Egypt, a great center of learning and the birthplace of many arts and sciences, furnished
an ideal environment for transcendental experimentation. here the black magicians of
atlantis continued to exercise their superhuman powers until they had completely under-mined and corrupted the morals of the primitive mysteries. by establishing a sacerdotal
caste they usurped the position formerly occupied by the initiates, and seized the reins of spiritual government. Thus black magic dictated the state religion and paralyzed the intellectual and spiritual activities of the individual by demanding his complete and un-hesitating acquiescence in the dogma formulated by the priestcraft. The Pharaoh became a puppet in the hands of the scarlet Council – a committee of arch-sorcerers elevated to
power by the priesthood.
these sorcerers then began the systematic destruction of all keys to the ancient wisdom,
so that none might have access to the knowledge necessary to reach adeptship without first becoming one of their order. they mutilated the rituals of the mysteries while professing to
preserve them, so that even though the neophyte passed through the degrees he could not secure the knowledge to which he was entitled. idolatry was introduced by encouraging the
worship of the images which in the beginning the wise had erected solely as symbols for study and meditation. False interpretations were given to the emblems and figures of the mysteries, and elaborate theologies were created to confuse the minds of their devotees. the
masses, deprived of their birthright of understanding and groveling in ignorance, eventually became the abject slaves of the spiritual impostors. superstition universally prevailed and
the black magicians completely dominated national affairs, with the result that humanity still suffers from the sophistries of the priestcrafts of atlantis and Egypt.
Fully convinced that their Scriptures sanctioned it, numerous mediæval Qabbalists
devoted their lives to the practice of ceremonial magic. the transcendentalism of the Qabbalists is founded upon the ancient and magical formula of King Solomon, who has long been considered by the Jews as the prince of ceremonial magicians.
among the Qabbalists of the middle ages were a great number of black magicians
who strayed from the noble concepts of the Sepher Yetzirah and became enmeshed in

307demonism and witchcraft. they sought to substitute magic mirrors, consecrated daggers,
and circles spread around posts of coffin nails, for the living of that virtuous life which,
without the assistance of complicated rituals or submundane creatures, unfailingly brings man to the state of true individual completion.
those who sought to control elemental spirits through ceremonial magic did so largely
with the hope of securing from the invisible worlds either rare knowledge or supernatural power. the little red demon of napoleon bonaparte and the infamous oracular heads of
de medici are examples of the disastrous results of permitting elemental beings to dictate
the course of human procedure. While the learned and godlike dæmon of Socrates seems to have been an exception, this really proves that the intellectual and moral status of the magician has much to do with the type of elemental he is capable of invoking. but even
the dæmon of Socrates deserted the philosopher when the sentence of death was passed.
transcendentalism and all forms of phenomenalistic magic are but blind alleys – outgrowths of atlantean sorcery; and those who forsake the straight path of philosophy to
wander therein almost invariably fall victims to their imprudence. man, incapable of controlling his own appetites, is not equal to the task of governing the fiery and tempestuous elemental spirits.
many a magician has lost his life as the result of opening a way whereby submundane
creatures could become active participants in his affairs. When Eliphas levi invoked the
spirit of Apollonius of Tyana, what did he hope to accomplish? Is the gratification of cu-riosity a motive sufficient to warrant the devotion of an entire lifetime to a dangerous and unprofitable pursuit? If the living Apollonius refused to divulge his secrets to the profane, is there any probability that after death he would disclose them to the curious-minded? levi himself did not dare to assert that the specter which appeared to him was actually the great philosopher, for Levi realized only too well the proclivity of elementals to imperson-ate those who have passed on. the majority of modern mediumistic apparitions are but elemental creatures masquerading through bodies composed of thought substance supplied by the very persons desiring to behold these wraiths of decarnate beings.
THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF BLACK MAGIC
some understanding of the intricate theory and practice of ceremonial magic may be
derived from a brief consideration of its underlying premises.
First. the visible universe has an invisible counterpart, the higher planes of which
are peopled by good and beautiful spirits; the lower planes, dark and foreboding, are the habitation of evil spirits and demons under the leadership of the Fallen Angel and his ten Princes.
Second. by means of the secret processes of ceremonial magic it is possible to contact
these invisible creatures and gain their help in some human undertaking. Good spirits willingly lend their assistance to any worthy enterprise, but the evil spirits serve only those who live to pervert and destroy.
Third. it is possible to make contracts with spirits whereby the magician becomes for
a stipulated time the master of an elemental being.

Fourth. true black magic is performed with the aid of a demoniacal spirit, who serves
the sorcerer for the length of his earthly life, with the understanding that after death the
magician shall become the servant of his own demon. For this reason a black magician will go to inconceivable ends to prolong his physical life, since there is nothing for him beyond the grave.
The most dangerous form of black magic is the scientific perversion of occult power
for the gratification of personal desire. Its less complex and more universal form is human selfishness, for selfishness is the fundamental cause of all worldly evil. A man will barter his eternal soul for temporal power, and down through the ages a mysterious process has been evolved which actually enables him to make this exchange. in its various branches
the black art includes nearly all forms of ceremonial magic, necromancy, witchcraft, sor-cery, and vampirism. under the same general heading are also included mesmerism and
hypnotism, except when used solely for medical purposes, and even then there is an ele-ment of risk for all concerned.
though the demonism of the middle ages seems to have disappeared, there is abundant evidence that in many forms of modern thought – especially the so-called “pros-perity” psychology, “willpower-building” metaphysics, and systems of “high-pressure” salesmanship – black magic has merely passed through a metamorphosis, and although its name be changed its nature remains the same.
BAPHOMET,THE GOAT OF MENDES.From Levi’sTranscendental Magic .
the practice of magic – either white or
black – depends upon the ability of the ad-ept to control the universal life force – that which Eliphas levi calls the great magical agent or the astral light. by the manipula-tion of this fluidic essence the phenomena of transcendentalism are produced. the famous hermaphroditic Goat of mendes was a composite creature formulated to symbolize this astral light . it is identical with baphomet the mystic pantheos of those disciples of ceremonial magic, the templars, who probably obtained it from the arabians.

A well-known magician of the Middle Ages was Dr. Johannes Faustus, more commonly known as Dr. Faust. By a study of magical writings he was enabled to bind to his
service an elemental who served him for many years in various capacities. strange legends are told concerning the magical powers possessed by Dr. Faust. Upon one occasion the philosopher, being apparently in a playful mood, threw his mantle over a number of eggs in a market-woman’s basket, causing them to hatch instantly. at another time, having
fallen overboard from a small boat, he was picked up and returned to the craft with his clothes still dry. But, like nearly all other magicians, Dr. Faust came at length to disaster; he was found one morning with a knife in his back, and it was commonly believed that his familiar spirit had murdered him. Although Goethe’s Dr. Faust is generally regarded as merely a fictional character, this old magician actually lived during the sixteenth cen-tury. Dr. Faust wrote a book describing his experiences with spirits, a section of which is reprinted below. (Dr. Faust must not be confused with Johann Fust, the printer.)
EXTRACT FROM THE BOOK OF DR. FAUST, WITTENBERG, 1524
(An abridged translation from the original German of a book ordered destroyed.)
“From my youth I followed art and science and was tireless in my reading of
books. among those which came to my hand was a volume containing all kinds
of invocations and magical formulæ. In this book I discovered information to the effect that a spirit, whether he be of the fire, the water, the earth or the air, can be compelled to do the will of a magician capable of controlling him. i also discovered that according as one spirit has more power than another, each is adapted for a different operation and each is capable of producing certain supernatural effects.
“after reading this wonderful book, i made several experiments, desiring to
rest the accuracy of the statements made therein. At first I had little faith that what was promised would take place. But at the very first invocation which I attempted a mighty spirit manifested to me, desiring to know why i had invoked him. his
coming so amazed me that I scarcely knew what to say, but finally asked him if he would serve me in my magical investigations. he replied that if certain conditions
were agreed upon he would. the conditions were that i should make a pact with
him. this i did not desire to do, but as in my ignorance i had not protected myself
with a circle and was actually at the mercy of the spirit, i did not dare to refuse
his request and resigned myself to the inevitable, considering it wisest to turn my mantle according to the wind.
“i then told him that if he would be serviceable to me according to my desires
and needs for a certain length of time, i would sign myself over to him. after the
pact had been arranged, this mighty spirit, whose name was Asteroth, introduced
me to another spirit by the name of Marbuel, who was appointed to be my servant.
I questioned Marbuel as to his suitability for my needs. I asked him how quick he
was, and he answered, ‘as swift as the winds.’ this did not satisfy me, so i replied,
‘You cannot become my servant. Go again whence you have come.’ soon another