The Chemical Marriage
ThE SELF-ADMITTED AUTHOR of The Chemical Marriage, Johann Valentin
Andreæ, born in Württemberg in 1586, was twenty-eight years of age when that
work was first published. It was presumably written about twelve years prior
to its publication – or when the author was fifteen or sixteen years old. The fact is almost incredible that one so young could produce a volume containing the wealth of symbolic thought and philosophy hidden between the lines of The Chemical Marriage. this book
makes the earliest known reference to Christian Rosencreutz, and is generally regarded as the third of the series of original rosicrucian manifestoes. as a symbolic work, the book
itself is hopelessly irreconcilable with the statements made by Andreæ concerning it. The story of The Chemical Marriage relates in detail a series of incidents occurring to an aged
man, presumably the Father C.R.C. of the Fama and Confessio. If Father C.R.C. was born
in 1378, as stated in the Confessio, and is identical with the Christian Rosencreutz of The
Chemical Marriage, he was elevated to the dignity of a Knight of the Golden Stone in the eighty-first year of his life (1459). In the light of his own statements, it is inconceivable that Andreæ could have been Father Rosy Cross.
Many figures found in the various books on symbolism published in the early part of
the seventeenth century bear a striking resemblance to the characters and episodes in The
Chemical Marriage. the alchemical wedding may prove to be the key to the riddle of baconian rosicrucianism. the presence in the German text of The Chemical Marriage of some
words in English indicates its author to have been conversant also with that language. the
following summary of the main episodes of the seven days of The Chemical Marriage will
give the reader a fairly comprehensive idea of the profundity of its symbolism.
THE FIRST DAY
Christian Rosencreutz, having prepared in his heart the Paschal Lamb together with
a small unleavened loaf, was disturbed while at prayer one evening before Easter by a violent storm which threatened to demolish not only his little house but the very hill on which it stood. in the midst of the tempest he was touched on the back and, turning, he
beheld a glorious woman with wings filled with eyes, and robed in sky-colored garments spangled with stars. in one hand she held a trumpet and in the other a bundle of letters in
every language. handing a letter to C.r.C., she immediately ascended into the air, at the
same time blowing upon her trumpet a blast which shook the house. upon the seal of the
letter was a curious cross and the words In hoc signo vinces. Within, traced in letters of
gold on an azure field, was an invitation to a royal wedding.
C.R.C. was deeply moved by the invitation because it was the fulfillment of a prophecy which he had received seven years before, but so unworthy did he feel that he was

538paralyzed with fear. At length, after resorting to prayer, he sought sleep. In his dreams he
found himself in a loathsome dungeon with a multitude of other men, all bound and fet-tered with great chains. the grievousness of their sufferings was increased as they stumbled over each other in the darkness. suddenly from above came the sound of trumpets;
the cover of the dungeon was lifted, and a ray of light pierced the gloom. Framed in the light stood a hoary-headed man who announced that a rope would be lowered seven times and whoever could cling to the rope would be drawn up to freedom.
Great confusion ensued. all sought to grasp the rope and many were pulled away from
it by others. C.r.C. despaired of being saved, but suddenly the rope swung towards him and, grasping it, he was raised from the dungeon. an aged woman called the “ancient
matron” wrote in a golden yellow book the names of those drawn forth, and each of the redeemed was given for remembrance a piece of gold bearing the symbol of the sun and the letters D L S. C.R.C., who had been injured while clinging to the rope, found it difficult
to walk. the aged woman bade him not to worry, but to thank God who had permitted him
to come into so high a light. thereupon trumpets sounded and C.r.C. awoke, but so vivid
was the dream that he was still sensible of the wounds received while asleep.
With renewed faith C. r. C. arose and prepared himself for the Hermetic Marriage. he
donned a white linen coat and bound a red ribbon crosswise over his shoulders. in his hat
he stuck four roses and for food he carried bread, water, and salt. before leaving his cottage, he knelt and vowed that whatever knowledge was revealed to him he would devote to the service of his neighbor. he then departed from his house with joy.
THE SECOND DAY
as he entered the forest surrounding his little house, it seemed to C.r.C. that all nature had joyously prepared for the wedding. as he proceeded singing merrily, he came to
a green heath in which stood three great cedars, one bearing a tablet with an inscription describing the four paths that led to the palace of the King: the first short and dangerous, the second circuitous, the third a pleasant and royal road, and the fourth suitable only for incorruptible bodies. Weary and perplexed, C.r.C. decided to rest and, cutting a slice of bread, was about to partake thereof when a white dove begged it from him. the dove was
at once attacked by a raven, and in his efforts to separate the birds C.r.C. unknowingly ran a considerable distance along one of the four paths – that leading southward. A terrific wind preventing him from retracing his steps, the wedding guest resigned himself to the loss of his bread and continued along the road until he espied in the distance a great gate. The sun being low, he hastened towards the portal, upon which, among other figures, was a tablet bearing the words Procul hinc procul ite profani.
a gatekeeper in sky-colored habit immediately asked C.r.C. for his letter of invitation
and, on receiving it, bade him enter and requested that he purchase a token. After describ-ing himself as a brother of the red rosie Cross, C.r.C. received in exchange for his water
bottle a golden disk bearing the letters S C. night drawing near, the wanderer hastened on
to a second gate, guarded by a lion, and to which was affixed a tablet with the words Date
et dabitur volis, where he presented a letter given him by the first gatekeeper. Being urged

539to purchase a token bearing the letters S M, he gave his little package of salt and then hastened on to reach the palace gates before they were locked for the night.
a beautiful virgin called Virgo Lucifera was extinguishing the castle lights as C.r.C. approached, and he was barely able to squeeze through the closing gates. As they closed they
caught part of his coat, which he was forced to leave behind. h ere his name was written in
the lord bridegroom’s little vellum book and he was presented with a new pair of shoes and
also a token bearing the letters S P N . he was then conducted by pages to a small chamber
where the “ice-grey locks” were cut from the crown of his head by invisible barbers, after which he was ushered into a spacious hall where a goodly number of kings, princes, and commoners were assembled. at the sound of trumpets each seated himself at the table,
taking a position corresponding to his dignity, so that C.r.C. received a very humble seat. Most of the pseudo-philosophers present being vain pretenders, the banquet became an orgy, which, however, suddenly ceased at the sound of stately and inspired music. For nearly half an hour no one spoke. then amidst a great sound the door of the dining hall swung open
and thousands of lighted tapers held by invisible hands entered. these were followed by the
two pages lighting the beautiful Virgo Lucifera seated on a self-moving throne. the whiteand-gold-robed virgin then rose and announced that to prevent the admission of unworthy persons to the mystical wed-ding a set of scales would be erected the following day upon which each guest would be weighed to determine his in-tegrity. those unwilling to undergo
this ordeal she stated should remain in the dining hall. she then withdrew, but
many of the tapers stayed to accompany the guests to their quarters for the night.
TITLE PAGE OF 1616 EDITION OF
CHYMISCHE HOCHZEIT: CHRISTIAN
ROSENCREUTZ.
From Rosencreutz’ Chemical Marriage.
the most remarkable of all the publications
involved in the rosicrucian controversy is
that of The Chemical Marriage, published
in strasbourg. this work, which is very rare,
should be reproduced in exact facsimile to
provide students with the opportunity of examining the actual text for the various forms
of cipher employed. Probably no other volume
in the history or literature created such a profound disturbance as this unpretentious little
book. immediately following its publication
the purpose for which the volume was intended became the subject of popular speculation.

540it was both attacked and defended by theologians and philosophers alike, but when the various contending elements are simmered down the mysteries surrounding the book remain unsolved. that its author was a man of exceptional learning was admitted, and it is noteworthy that those minds which possessed the deepest understanding of nature’s mysteries were among those profoundly impressed by the contents of The Chemical Marriage.
most of those present were presumptuous enough to believe that they could be safety
weighed, but nine – including C.r.C. – felt their shortcomings so deeply that they feared the outcome and remained in the hall while the others were led away to their sleeping chambers. these nine were bound with ropes and left alone in darkness. C.r.C. then
dreamed that he saw many men suspended over the earth by threads, and among them flew an aged man who, cutting here and there a thread, caused many to fall to earth. those who
in arrogance had soared to lofty heights accordingly fell a greater distance and sustained more serious injury than the more humble ones who, falling but a short distance, often landed without mishap. Considering this dream to be a good omen, C.r.C. related it to a companion, continuing in discourse with him until dawn.
THE THIRD DAY
soon after dawn the trumpets sounded and the Virgo Lucifera, arrayed in red velvet,
girded with a white sash, and crowned with a laurel wreath, entered accompanied by two hundred men in red-and-white livery. she intimated to C.r.C. and his eight companions
that they might fare better than the other, self-satisfied guests. Golden scales were then hung in the midst of the hall and near them were placed seven weights, one good-sized, four small, and two very large. the men in livery, each carrying a naked sword and a
strong rope, were divided into seven groups and from each group was chosen a captain, who was given charge of one of the weights. having remounted her high throne, Virgo
Lucifera ordered the ceremony to begin. The first to step on the scales was an emperor so virtuous that the balances did not tip until six weights had been placed upon the opposite end. he was therefore turned over to the sixth group. the rich and poor alike stood upon
the scales, but only a few passed the test successfully. to these were given velvet robes
and wreaths of laurel, after which they were seated upon the steps of Virgo Lucifera’ s
throne. those who failed were ridiculed and scourged.
The “inquisition” being finished, one of the captains begged Virgo Lucifera to permit the
nine men who had declared themselves unworthy also to be weighed, and this caused C. r.C.
anguish and fear. Of the first seven one succeeded and was greeted with joy. C.R.C. was the eighth and he not only withstood all the weights but even when three men hung on the op-posite end of the beam he could not be moved. a page cried out: “ that is hE!” C. r.C. was
quickly set at liberty and permitted to release one of the captives. He chose the first emperor. Virgo Lucifera then requested the red roses that C.R.C. carried, which he immediately gave her. the ceremony of the scales ended about ten o’clock in the forenoon.
after agreeing upon the penalties to be imposed upon those whose shortcomings had
been thus exposed, a dinner was served to all. the few successful “artists,” including
C.R.C., were given the chief seats, after which the Golden Fleece and a Flying Lion were bestowed upon them in the name of the bridegroom. Virgo Lucifera then presented a mag-