Fundamentals of
Qabbalistic Cosmogony
ThE Qabbalists ConCEivE of the supreme Deity as an incomprehensible
Principle to be discovered only through the process of eliminating, in order,
all its cognizable attributes. That which remains – when every knowable thing
has been removed – is ain soPh, the eternal state of Being. Although indefinable, the
absolute permeates all space. abstract to the degree of inconceivability, ain soPh is the
unconditioned state of all things. substances, essences, and intelligences are manifested
out of the inscrutability of ain soPh, but the absolute itself is without substance, essence, or intelligence. AIN SOPH may be likened to a great field of rich earth out of which rises a myriad of plants, each different in color, formation, and fragrance, yet each with its roots in the same dark loam – which, however, is unlike any of the forms nurtured by it. the “plants” are universes, gods, and man, all nourished by ain soPh and all with
their source in one definitionless essence; all with their spirits, souls, and bodies fashioned from this essence, and doomed, like the plant, to return to the black ground – ain soPh,
the only immortal – whence they came.
ain soPh was referred to by the Qabbalists as The Most Ancient of all the Ancients.
it was always considered as sexless. its symbol was a closed eye. While it may be truly
said of AIN SOPH that to define It is to defile It, the Rabbis postulated certain theories regarding the manner in which ain soPh projected creations out of itself, and they also
assigned to this absolute not-being certain symbols as being descriptive, in part at least,
of Its powers. The nature of AIN SOPH they symbolize by a circle, itself emblematic of eternity. this hypothetical circle encloses a dimensionless area of incomprehensible life,
and the circular boundary of this life is abstract and measureless infinity .
According to this concept, God is not only a Center but also Area. Centralization is
the first step towards limitation. Therefore, centers which form in the substances of AIN SOPH are finite because they are predestined to dissolution back into the Cause of them -
selves, while AIN SOPH Itself is infinite because It is the ultimate condition of all things. The circular shape given to AIN SOPH signifies that space is hypothetically enclosed within a great crystal-like globe, outside of which there is nothing, not even a vacuum. Within this globe – symbolic of ain soPh – creation and dissolution take place. Every
element and principle that will ever be used in the eternities of Kosmic birth, growth, and decay is within the transparent substances of this intangible sphere. It is the Kosmic Egg which is not broken till the great day “be With us,” which is the end of the Cycle of necessity, when all things return to their ultimate cause.
in the process of creation the diffused life of ain soPh retires from the circumference
to the center of the circle and establishes a point, which is the first manifesting One – the

361primitive limitation of the all-pervading o. When the Divine Essence thus retires from the
circular boundary to the center, it leaves behind the abyss, or, as the Qabbalists term it, the
Great Privation. thus, in ain soPh is established a twofold condition where previously
had existed but one. The first condition is the central point – the primitive objectified radiance of the eternal, subjectified life. About this radiance is darkness caused by the depriva-tion of the life which is drawn to the center to create the first point, or universal germ. The universal ain soPh, therefore, no longer shines through space, but rather upon space from
an established first point. Isaac Myer describes this process as follows:
“The Ain Soph at first was filling All and then made an absolute concentration
into itself which produced the abyss, Deep, or space, the aveer Qadmon or Primitive Air, the Azoth; but this is not considered in the Qabbalah as a perfect void or vacuum, a perfectly empty space, but is thought of as the Waters or Crystalline
Chaotic sea, in which was a certain degree of light inferior to that by which all the
created [worlds and hierarchies] were made.” (See The Qabbalah.)
in the secret teachings of the Qabbalah it is taught that man’s body is enveloped in an
ovoid of bubble-like iridescence, which is called the auric Egg. this is the causal sphere
of man. it bears the same relationship to man’s physical body that the globe of ain soPh
bears to its created universes. in fact, this auric Egg is the ain soPh sphere of the entity
called man. in reality, therefore, the supreme consciousness of man is in this aura, which
extends in all directions and completely encircles his lower bodies. as the consciousness in
the Kosmic Egg is withdrawn into a central point, which is then called God – the Supreme one – so the consciousness in the auric Egg of man is concentrated, thereby causing the
establishment of a point of consciousness called the Ego. as the universes in nature are
formed from powers latent in the Kosmic Egg, so everything used by man in all his incarna-tions throughout the kingdoms of nature is drawn from the latent powers within his auric
Egg. man never passes from this egg; it remains even after death. his births, deaths, and
rebirths all take place within it, and it cannot be broken until the lesser day “ be With us,”
when mankind – like the universe – is liberated from the Wheel of necessity.
THE QABBALISTIC SYSTEM OF WORLDS
on the accompanying circular chart, the concentric rings represent diagrammatically
the forty rates of vibration (called by the Qabbalists Spheres) which emanate from AIN SOPH. The circle X 1 is the outer boundary of space. It circumscribes the area of AIN soPh. the nature of ain soPh itself is divided into three parts, represented by the
spaces respectively between X 1 and X 2, X 2 and X 3, X 3 and A 1; thus:
X 1 to X 2, ,ןיא ain, the vacuum of pure spirit.
X 2 to X 3, ,ףוס ןיא ain soPh, the limitless and boundless.
X 3 to A 1, ,רוא ףוס ןיא ain soPh aur, the limitless light.

362it should be borne in mind that in the beginning the supreme substance, ain, alone
permeated the area of the circle; the inner rings had not yet come into manifestation. as
the Divine Essence concentrated Itself, the rings X 2 and X 3 became apprehensible, for
ain soPh is a limitation of ain, and ain soPh aur, or light, is a still greater limitation. thus the nature of the supreme one is considered to be threefold, and from this
threefold nature the powers and elements of creation were reflected into the Abyss left by the motion of ain soPh towards the center of itself. the continual motion of ain soPh
towards the center of itself resulted in the establishment of the dot in the circle. the dot
was called God, as being the supreme individualization of the Universal Essence. Con-cerning this the Zohar says:
“When the concealed of the Concealed wished to reveal Himself He first made
a single point: the Infinite was entirely unknown, and diffused no light before this luminous point violently broke through into vision.”
THE HEBREW TRIAD.
The Qabbalists used the letter ,שShin, to signify
the trinity of the first three Sephiroth. The central circle slightly above the other two is the first sephira – Kether, the White head, the Crown. the other two circles represent Chochmah, the Father, and Binah, the Mother. From the union of the Divine Father and the Divine Mother are pro-duced the worlds and the generations of living things. The three flame-like points of the letter שhave long been used to conceal this Creative triad of the Qabbalists.
the name of this point is i am, called by the hebrews Eheieh . the Qabbalists gave
many names to this dot. on this subject Christian D. Ginsberg writes, in substance: the
dot is called the first crown, because it occupies the highest position. It is called the aged, because it is the first emanation. It is called the primordial or smooth point. It is called the white head, the Long Face – macroprosophus – and the inscrutable height, because it
controls and governs all the other emanations.
When the white shining point had appeared, it was called Kether, which means the
Crown, and out of it radiated nine great globes, which arranged themselves in the form of a tree. These nine together with the first crown constituted the first system of Sephiroth.
These ten were the first limitation of ten abstract points within the nature of AIN SOPH Itself. The power of AIN SOPH did not descend into these globes but rather was reflected upon them as the light of the sun is reflected upon the earth and planets. These ten globes were called the shining sapphires, and it is believed by many rabbins that the word sapphire is the basis of the word Sephira (the singular of Sephiroth). The great area which
had been privated by the withdrawal of ain soPh into the central point, Kether, was

363now filled by four concentric globes called worlds, or spheres, and the light of the ten
Sephiroth was reflected down through each of these in turn. This resulted in the establish -
ment of four symbolical trees, each hearing the reflections of the ten Sephirothic globes. The 40 spheres of creation out of AIN SOPH are divided into four great world chains, as follows:
A 1 to A 10, • Atziluth , the boundless World of Divine names.
B 1 to B 10, • Briah, the archangelic World of Creations.
C 1 to C 10, • Yetzirah, the Hierarchal World of Formations.
D 1 to D 10, • Assiah, the Elemental World of substances.
THE QABBALISTIC SCHEME OF THE FOUR WORLDS.
In the above chart the dark line between X 3 and A 1 constitutes the boundary of the original dot, while
the concentric circles within this heavier line symbolize the emanations and the worlds which came forth from the dot. As this dot is contained within the outer rings X 1, X 2, and X 3, and represents the first es-