The Cross and
the Crucifixion
OnE OF THE MOST INTERESTING legends concerning the cross is that preserved in Aurea Legenda, by Jacobus de V orgaine. The Story is to the effect
that adam, feeling the end of his life was near, entreated his son seth to make
a pilgrimage to the Garden of Eden and secure from the angel on guard at the entrance the
Oil of Mercy which God had promised mankind. seth did not know the way; but his father
told him it was in an eastward direction, and the path would be easy to follow, for when adam and Eve were banished from the Garden of the lord, upon the path which their feet
had trod the grass had never grown.
seth, following the directions of his father, discovered the Garden of Eden without
difficulty. The angel who guarded the gate permitted him to enter, and in the midst of the garden seth beheld a great tree, the branches of which reached up to heaven. the tree was
in the form of a cross, and stood on the brink of a precipice which led downward into the depths of hell. among the roots of the tree he saw the body of his brother Cain, held prisoner by the entwining limbs. the angel refused to give seth the Oil of Mercy, but presented him instead with three seeds from the Tree of Life (some say the Tree of Knowledge). With these seth returned to his father, who was so overjoyed that he did not desire to live
longer. three days later he died, and the three seeds were buried in his mouth, as the angel
had instructed. the seeds became a sapling with three trunks in one, which absorbed into
itself the blood of adam, so that the life of adam was in the tree. noah dug up this tree by
the roots and took it with him into the ark. after the waters subsided, he buried the skull
of adam under mount Calvary, and planted the tree on the summit of mount lebanon.
Moses beheld a visionary being in the midst of this tree (the burning bush) and from
it cut the magical rod with which he was able to bring water out of a stone. but because
he failed to call upon the lord the second time he struck the rock, he was not permitted to
carry the sacred staff into the Promised land; so he planted it in the hills of moab. after
much searching, King David discovered the tree; and his son, Solomon, tried to use it for a pillar in his Temple, but his carpenters could not cut it so that it would fit; it was always either too long or too short. at last, disgusted, they cast it aside and used it for a bridge
to connect Jerusalem with the surrounding hills. When the Queen of Sheba came to visit King Solomon she was expected to walk across this bridge. Instead, when she beheld the tree, she refused to put her foot upon it, but, after kneeling and praying, removed her san-dals and forded the stream. This so impressed King Solomon that he ordered the log to be overlaid with golden places and placed above the door of his temple. there it remained
until his covetous grandson stole the gold, and buried the tree so that the crime would not be discovered.

From the ground where the tree was buried there immediately bubbled forth a spring
of water, which became known as bethesda. to it the sick from all syria came to be
healed. the angel of the pool became the guardian of the tree, and it remained undisturbed
for many years. Eventually the log floated to the surface and was used as a bridge again,
this time between Calvary and Jerusalem; and over it Jesus passed to be crucified. There was no wood on Calvary; so the tree was cut into two parts to serve as the cross upon which the Son of Man was crucified. The cross was set up at the very spot where the skull of adam had been buried. later, when the cross was discovered by the Empress helena,
the wood was found to be of four different varieties contained in one tree (representing the elements), and thereafter the cross continued to heal all the sick who were permitted to touch it.
the prevalent idea that the reverence for the cross is limited to the Christian world is
disproved by even the most superficial investigation of its place in religious symbolism. the early Christians used every means possible to conceal the pagan origin of their sym-bols, doctrines, and rituals. they either destroyed the sacred books of other peoples among
whom they settled, or made them inaccessible to students of comparative philosophy, ap-parently believing that in this way they could stamp out all record of the pre-Christian ori-gin of their doctrines. in some cases the writings of various ancient authors were tampered
with, passages of a compromising nature being removed or foreign material interpolated. The supposedly spurious passage in Josephus concerning Jesus is an example adduced to illustrate this proclivity.
THE LOST LIBRARIES OF ALEXANDRIA
Prior to the Christian Era seven hundred thousand of the most valuable books, written upon parchment, papyrus, vellum, and wax, and also tablets of stone, terra cotta, and wood, were gathered from all parts of the ancient world and housed in alexandria, in
buildings specially prepared for the purpose. This magnificent repository of knowledge was destroyed by a series of three fires. The parts that escaped the conflagration lighted by Cæsar to destroy the fleet in the harbor were destroyed about A.D. 389 by the Christians in obedience to the edict of theodosius, who had ordered the destruction of the serapeum, a
building sacred to Serapis in which the volumes were kept. This conflagration is supposed to have destroyed the library that marcus antonius had presented to Cleopatra to compensate in part for that burned in the fire of the year 51.
Concerning this, h. P. blavatsky, in Isis Unveiled, has written:
“They [the Rabbis of Palestine and the wise men] say that not all the rolls and
manuscripts, reported in history to have been burned by Cæsar, by the Christian mob, in 389, and by the Arab General Amru, perished as it is commonly believed; and the story they tell is the following: at the time of the contest for the throne,
in 51 B. C., between Cleopatra and her brother Dionysius Ptolemy, the Bruckion, which contained over seven hundred thousand rolls all bound in wood and fire-proof parchment, was undergoing repairs and a great portion of the original manu-

603scripts, considered among the most precious, and which were not duplicated, were
stored away in the house of one of the librarians. (...)Several hours passed between the burning of the fleet, set on fire by Cæsar’s order, and the moment when the first buildings situated near the harbor caught fire in their turn; and (...) the librarians, aided by several hundred slaves attached to the museum, succeeded in saving the most precious of the rolls.” in all probability, the books which were saved lie buried either in Egypt or in india, and until they are discovered the modern world must
remain in ignorance concerning many great philosophical and mystical truths. the
ancient world more clearly understood these missing links – the continuity of the pagan mysteries in Christianity.
THE CROSS IN PAGAN SYMBOLISM
in his article on the Cross and Crucifixion in the Encyclopædia Britannica, thomas
Macall Fallow casts much light on the antiquity of this ideograph.
“the use of the cross as a religious symbol in pre-Christian times, and among
non-Christian peoples, may probably be regarded as almost universal, and in very many cases it was connected with some form of nature worship.”
HISTORY OF THE HOLY CROSS.
From Berjeau’s History of the Holy Cross.
(1) Adam directing Seth how to reach the Gar -
den of Eden.
(2) Seth placing the three seeds from the Tree of
life under the tongue of the dead adam.
(3) The Queen of Sheba, refusing to place her
feet upon the sacred tree, forded the stream.
(4) Placing the sacred tree over the door of
solomon’s temple.
(5) The crucifixion of Christ upon a cross made
from the wood of the holy tree.
(6) Distinguishing the true cross from the other
two by testing its power to raise a corpse to life.

604not only is the cross itself a familiar object in the art of all nations, but the veneration for it is an essential part of the religious life of the greater part of humanity. it is a
common symbol among the american indians – north, Central, and south. William W.
seymour states:
“The Aztec goddess of rain bore a cross in her hand, and the Toltecs claimed
that their deity, Quetzalcoatl, taught them the sign and ritual of the cross, hence his
staff, or sceptre of power, resembled a crosier, and his mantle was covered with red crosses.” (The Cross in Tradition, History and Art.)
The cross is also highly revered by the Japanese and Chinese. To the Pythagoreans the most sacred of all numbers was the 10, the symbol of which is an X, or cross. In both the Japanese and Chinese languages the character of the number 10 is a cross. the buddhist wheel of life is composed of two crosses superimposed, and
its eight points are still preserved to Christendom in the peculiarly formed cross of the Knights Templars, which is essentially Buddhistic. India has preserved the cross, not only in its carvings and paintings, but also in its architectonics; a great number of its temples – like the churches and cathedrals of Christendom – are raised from cruciform foundations.
on the mandalas of the t ibetans, heaven is laid out in the form of a cross, with a demon king at each of the four gates. A remarkable cross of great antiquity was discovered in the island caves of Elephanta in the harbor of bombay. Crosses of various kinds were
favorite motifs in the art of Chaldea, Phœnicia, Egypt, and assyria. the initiates of the
Eleusinian mysteries of Greece were given a cross which they suspended about their
necks on a chain, or cord, at the time of initiation. to the rosicrucians, alchemists, and
illuminati, the cross was the symbol of light, because each of the three letters l v X is
derived from some part of the cross.
THE TAU CROSS
There are three distinct forms of the cross. The first is called the TAU (more correctly
the TA V). It closely resembles the modern letter T, consisting of a horizontal bar resting on a vertical column, the two arms being of equal length. An oak tree cut off some feet above the ground and its upper part laid across the lower in this form was the symbol of the Druid god Hu. it is suspected that this symbol originated among the Egyptians from
the spread of the horns of a bull or ram (Taurus or Aries) and the vertical line of its face. this is sometimes designated as the hammer cross, because if held by its vertical base it
is not unlike a mallet or gavel. in one of the Qabbalistic masonic legends, Chiram abiff
is given a hammer in the form of a tau by his ancestor, tubal-cain. the tau cross is
preserved to modern Masonry under the symbol of the T square. This appears to be the oldest form of the cross extant.
the tau cross was inscribed on the forehead of every person admitted into the mysteries of mithras. When a king was initiated into the Egyptian mysteries, the tau was