Fifteen Rosicrucian and
Qabbalistic Diagrams
In HIS WELL -KNOWN WORK, The Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries,
Hargrave Jennings reproduces five Qabbalistic charts which he declares to be
genuine rosicrucian drawings. he gives no information concerning their origin
nor does he attempt an elucidation of their symbolism. a recent writer who reproduced
one of these charts correlated it to the emblematic tomb of Father C.R.C., thus exposing the true nature of Christian Rosencreutz.
The five plates reproduced in Hargrave Jennings’ book are part of a series of fifteen
diagrams which appear in The Magical, Qabbalistical, and Theosophical Writings of
Georgius von Welling, on the Subject of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. this extremely rare
volume was published at Frankfort and Leipzig in 1735 and 1760. The numbers and fig-ures on the charts refer to the chapters and sections of the Writings. These fifteen charts constitute a remarkable and invaluable addition to the few other known admittedly au-thentic Qabbalistic and rosicrucian diagrams.
lucifer is the greatest mystery of symbolism. the secret knowledge of the rosicrucians concerning lucifer is nowhere so plainly set forth as in these plates, which virtually
reveal his true identity, a carefully guarded secret about which little has been written. Lucifer is represented by the number 741.
V on Welling does not give a complete exposition of the fifteen charts; to have done so
would have been contrary to the principles of Qabbalistic philosophy. The deeper signifi-cance of the symbols is revealed only by profound study and contemplation.

TABLE I,
Figures 1-11.
Figure 1 is a Ptolemaic chart showing the
true relationship existing between the primordial elements. its secret significance is as follows: the outer ring enclosed
by the lines A and B is
the region of Schamayim, a Qabbalistic name for the supreme Deity,
signifying the expanse of the heavens, or a spiritual fiery water. Schamayim is “the ocean of spirit,
“ within which all cre-ated and uncreated things exist and by the life of which they are animat-ed. in the lower worlds
schamayim becomes the
astral light.
the space between B and C marks the orbits or planes of the seven spiritual intelligences called the Divine Planets (not the visible planets). According to the Mysteries, the souls of men enter the lower worlds through ring B, the fixed stars. All creation reflects the
glory of Schamayim, the energy that filters into the spheres of the elements through the win-dows of the stars and planets. between C and D lies the region of the subtle, spiritual air, a
subdivision of ether. D to E marks the surface of the earth and sea, by which are also meant
grades of ether. E to F marks the lower region, called “ the Gathering of the Waters and the
Production of the Virgin Earth, “ or “Ares. “ The alchemists called this “quicksand,” the true mystic foundation of the solid earth. F to G marks the circle of the subterranean air, which
is more dense and coarse than that in the outer space, C to D. in this denser atmosphere the
stellar influences and celestial impulses are crystallized into corporeal spirits, thus forming the multitude of forms which exist without knowledge of their own fiery source. G is the
region of the central fire of the element earth, a coarse fire in contradistinction to the divine fiery Schamayim. The sphere of the starry heavens likewise has its opposite in the sphere of the subterranean air; and the sphere of the upper air (or subtle vaporous water) has its op-posite in the sphere E to F. the focal point, D to E, between the three higher and the three
lower spheres, is called “ the reservoir.” it receives impressions from both the superior and
the inferior regions and is common to both.

Figure 2 is the Qabbalistic symbol of elemental water; Figure 9 represents the spiritual
invisible water. Figure 3 is the Qabbalistic symbol of elemental air; Figure 7 represents
the spiritual and invisible air. Figure 4 is the Qabbalistic sign of the elemental earth; Fig-ure 8 represents the spiritual and invisible earth. Figure 5 is the Qabbalistic sign of the elemental fire; Figure 6 represents the spiritual and invisible fire. Figures 6, 7, 8, and 9 symbolize the four elements before the descent of Lucifer. They are the four rivers spo-ken of in Genesis, having their source in the one river, Figure W, which represents the elements superimposed on one another. the golden ball in the center is schamayim, the
fiery source of all elements. Figure 11 is the emblem of the beginning and the end of all creatures. From it all things proceed and to it all must return again, to become one with the fiery water of divine understanding.
TABLE II,Figures 12-51.
Figures 12, 13, 14
demonstrate the sphere as a symbol of motion to be emblematic of fire, water, and air; and the cube as a symbol of weight to be emblematic of earth. the
sphere rests upon a point, the cube upon a surface; the sphere is therefore used to symbolize spirit, and the cube, matter. Figure 14 demonstrates that atmosphere rushing in behind a falling ob-ject increases its velocity and apparently adds to its weight. the essential
nature of each element is occultly signified by the peculiar symbol and character assigned to it.
Of Figure 15, the symbol of salt, von Welling writes, in substance: The cube has six
sides, corresponding to the six days of creation, with the point of rest (the seventh day) in the center of the cube. on each surface of the cube appear the signs of the four elements
[triangles]. The alchemists declared that salt was the first created substance produced by the fire (Schamayim) which flowed out of God. In salt all creation is concentrated; in salt are the beginning and end of all things. the cube, furthermore, is composed of twelve

453bodies, each of which has six sides. these bodies are the twelve fundamental pillars of
the true invisible church, and when these twelve bodies are multiplied by their six sides
the magical number 72 results. The wise have said that nothing is perfect until it has been dissolved, separated, and again united so that it becomes a body composed of twelve bod-ies, like the cube. the cube also consists of six pyramids with the six surfaces of the cube
as their bases. the points of these six pyramids meet at the center of the cube. these six
pyramids, each consisting of four triangles, signify the elements, and produce the magical number 24, which refers to the Elders before the Throne. The six surfaces and the point constitute the magical number 7. If 7 be multiplied by 7 again, and so on 7 times, the answer will reveal the method used by the ancients for measuring the periods of eternity; thus: (1) 7 X 7 = 49; (2) 49 X 7 = 343; (3) 343 X 7 = 2,401; (4) 2,401 X 7 = 16,807; (5):16,807 X 7 = 117,649; (6) 117,649 X 7 = 823,543; (7) 823,543 X 7 = 5,764,801. (This is not to be taken as earth years or times.) The 5,000, 000 represents the great hall year; the 700,000 the great Sabbath year, wherein all human beings gradually gain true understand-ing and become heirs to their original and eternal inheritance, which was lost when they were enmeshed in the lower elements. The 64,800 is the number of the fallen angels, and the last one year signifies the liberation of Lucifer and return to his original estate.
Figure 16 is another symbol of salt, while Figure 17 (the dot) is the sign of spirit, gold, the
sun, or the germ of life. If the dot be moved before itself it becomes a line, Figure 18. This mo-tion of the dot is the first motion. The beginning and end of every line is a dot. Figure 19 is the circle. It is the second motion and the most perfect of all lines. Out of it are formed all figures and bodies imaginable. Figure 20 represents the outpouring of the upper and spiritual life into manifestation. Figure 21 represents darkness, for it is the loosening of the subterrene destruc-tive principle. Figure 20 is also the symbol of day, and Figure 21 of night.
Figure 22 is a symbol of water; Figure 23 is the complete universal character of light
and darkness. the upright triangle represents schamayim; the inverted triangle the dark
earth which imprisons the infernal subterranean fire. It is “The First Day of Creation,” or the time of the separation of Schamayim and Ares. Figure 24 represents the six days of creation and proves that the elements are an outflow of the Divine Fire which, breaking up, becomes the substances of the tangible universe, as signified in Figure 25.
Figure 26 is the character of the air, showing that air is born out of the Eternal Light
and the ethereal water. Figure 27 is the character of water. It is the inversion of Figure 26, indicating that its origin is from the lower fire and not the higher. Its upper part sig-nifies that water does not lack the Divine element, but as a universal mirror reflects the heavenly influences. Figures 28 and 29 are symbols of salt, showing that it is both fire and water in one. Figure 30 is the character of fire in all its attributes, and Figure M (the same inverted), water in all its powers. Figure 32 is the character of salt in all its attri-butes. Figure 33 represents both gold and the sun. Their essential natures are identical, being formed from the first fire out of Schamayim. They are perfect, as can be seen from their symbol, for no more perfect form can be produced out of the dot than the circle.
Figure 34 is the character of the greater and lesser worlds; as the dot is surrounded
by its circumference, this world is surrounded by Schamayim. Man (the Little World) is included in this symbol because his inner nature is potential gold (Aphar Min Haadamah),