The Mysteries
and Their Emissaries
DiD THAT DIVINE KNOWLEDGE which constituted the supreme possession
of the pagan priestcrafts survive the destruction of their temples? is it yet accessible to mankind, or does it lie buried beneath the rubbish of ages, entombed
within the very sanctuaries that were once illuminated by its splendor? “in Egypt,” writes
origen, “the philosophers have a sublime and secret knowledge respecting the nature of God.” What did Julian imply when he spoke of the secret initiations into the sacred Mys-teries of the seven-rayed God who lifted souls to salvation through his own nature? Who
were the blessed theurgists who understood them profundities concerning which Julian dared not speak? if this inner doctrine were always concealed from the masses, for whom
a simpler code had been devised, is it not highly probable that the exponents of every aspect of modern civilization – philosophic, ethical, religious, and scientific-are ignorant of the true meaning of the very theories and tenets on which their beliefs are founded? Do the arts and sciences that the race has inherited from older nations conceal beneath their fair exterior a mystery so great that only the most illumined intellect can grasp its import? Such is undoubtedly the case .
albert Pike, who has gathered ample evidence of the excellence of the doctrines promulgated by the Mysteries, supports his assertions by quoting from the writings of Clem -
ent of alexandria, Plato, Epictetus, Proclus, aristophanes, and Cicero, all of whom unite
in lauding the high ideals of these institutions. From the unqualified testimony of such reputable authorities no reasonable doubt can exist that the initiates of Greece, Egypt, and other ancient countries possessed the correct solution to those great cultural, intellectual, moral, and social problems which in an unsolved state confront the humanity of the twen-tieth century. The reader must not interpret this statement to mean that antiquity had fore-seen and analyzed every complexity of this generation, but rather that the Mysteries had evolved a method whereby the mind was so trained in the fundamental verities of life that it was able to cope intelligently with any emergency which might arise. thus the reasoning faculties were organized by a simple process of mental culture, for it was asserted that where reason reigns supreme, inconsistency cannot exist. Wisdom, it was maintained, lifts man to the condition of Godhood, a fact which explains the enigmatical statement that the mysteries transformed “roaring beasts into divinities.”
the preeminence of any philosophical system can be determined only by the excellence of its products. the mysteries have demonstrated the superiority of their culture by
giving to the world minds of such overwhelming greatness, souls of such beatific vision, and lives of such outstanding impeccability that even after the lapse of ages the teachings of these individuals constitute the present spiritual, intellectual, and ethical standards of

652the race. the initiates of the various mystery schools of past ages form a veritable golden
chain of supermen and superwomen connecting heaven and earth. they are the links of
that homeric “golden chain” with which Zeus boasted he could bind the several parts of
the universe to the pinnacle of olympus. the sons and daughters of isis are indeed an
illustrious line – founders of sciences and philosophies, patrons of arts and crafts, supporting by the transcendency of their divinely given power the structures of world reli-gions erected to do them homage. Founders of doctrines which have molded the lives of uncounted generations, these initiate-t eachers bear witness to that spiritual culture which
has always existed – and always will exist – as a divine institution in the world of men.
those who represent an ideal beyond the comprehension of the masses must face
the persecution of the unthinking multitude who are without that divine idealism which inspires progress and those rational faculties which unerringly sift truth from falsehood. the lot of the initiate-t eacher is therefore almost invariably an unhappy one. Pythagoras, crucified and his university burned; Hypatia, torn from her chariot and rended limb from limb; Jacques de Molay, whose memory survives the consuming flame; Savonarola, burned in the square of Florence; Galileo, forced to recant upon bended knee; Giordano Bruno, burned by the Inquisition; Roger Bacon, compelled to carry on his experiments in the secrecy of his cell and leave his knowledge hidden under cipher; Dante alighieri, dying in exile from his beloved city; Francis Bacon, patient. under the burden of persecution; Cagliostro, the most vilified man of modern times – all this illustrious line bear unending witness of man’s inhumanity to man. the world has ever been prone to heap plaudits upon
its fools and calumny upon its thinkers. here and there notable exceptions occur, as in the
case of the Comte de St.-Germain, a philosopher who survived his inquisitors and through the sheer transcendency of his genius won a position of comparative immunity. but even
the illustrious Comte – whose illumined intellect merited the homage of the world – could not escape being branded an impostor, a charlatan, and an adventurer. From this long fist of immortal men and women who have represented the ancient Wisdom before the world,
three have been chosen as outstanding examples for more detailed consideration: the first the most eminent woman philosopher of all ages; the second the most maligned and per-secuted man since the beginning of Christian Era; the third the most brilliant and the most successful modern exponent of this ancient Wisdom.
HYPATIA
sitting in the chair of philosophy previously occupied by her father, theon the mathematician, the immortal Hypatia was for many years the central figure in the Alexandrian School of Neo-Platonism. Famed alike for the depth of her learning and the charm of her person, beloved by the citizens of Alexandria, and frequently consulted by the magistrates of that city, this noble woman stands out from the pages of history as the greatest of the pagan martyrs. a personal disciple of the magician Plutarch, and versed in the profundities of the Platonic
school, hypatia eclipsed in argument and public esteem every proponent of the Christian doctrines in northern Egypt. While her writings perished at the time of the burning of the library
of alexandria by the mohammedans, some hint of their nature may be gleaned from the state-

653ments of contemporaneous authors. hypatia evidently wrote a commentary on the Arithmetic
of Diophantus, another on the Astronomical Canon of Ptolemy, and a third on the Conics of
apollonius of Perga. synesius, bishop of Ptolemais, her devoted friend, wrote to hypatia for
assistance in the construction of an astrolabe and a hydroscope. Recognizing the transcendency of her intellect, the learned of many nations flocked to the academy where she lectured.
THE TABLE OF CEBES.
From Vænius’
Theatro Moral de la Vida Humana.
there is legend to the effect that the
tablet of Cebes, a dialogue between
Cebes and Gerundio, was based upon
an ancient table set up in the temple
of Kronos at Athens or Thebes which
depicted the entire progress of human
life. the author of the Tablet of Cebes
was a disciple of socrates, and lived
about 390 B.C. The world is repre -
sented as a great mountain. out of the
earth at the base of it come he myriads
of human creatures who climb upward
in search of truth and immortality.
above the clouds which conceal the
summit of the mountain is the goal of
human attainment – true happiness.
The figures and groups are arranged
as follows: (1) the door of the wall of
life; (2) the Genius or Intelligence;
(3) deceit (4) opinions, desires, and
pleasures; (5) fortune; (6) the strong;
(7) venery, insatiability, flattery; (8)
sorrow; (9) sadness; (10) misery; (11)
grief, (12) rage or despair; (13) the
house of misfortune; (14) penitence; (15) true opinion; (16) false opinion; (17) false doctrine; (18) poets,
orators, geometers, et. al.; (19) incontinence, sexual indulgence, and opinion; (20) the road of the true doc -
trine (21) continence and patience; (22) the true doctrine; (23) truth and persuasion; (24) science and the
virtues; (25) happiness, (26) the highest (first) pleasure of the wise man; (27) the lazy and the strays.
a number of writers have credited the teachings of hypatia with being Christian in
spirit; in fact she removed the veil of mystery in which the new cult had enshrouded itself, discoursing with such clarity upon its most involved principles that many newly converted to the Christian faith deserted it to become her disciples. hypatia not only
proved conclusively the pagan origin of the Christian faith but also exposed the purported miracles then advanced by the Christians as tokens of divine preference by demonstrating the natural laws controlling the phenomena.
at this time Cyril – later to be renowned as the founder of the doctrine of the Christian
Trinity and canonized for his zeal – was Bishop of Alexandria. Seeing in Hypatia a con-

654tinual menace to the promulgation of the Christian faith, Cyril – indirectly at least – was
the cause of her tragic end. Despite every later effort to exonerate him from the stigma of her murder, the incontrovertible fact remains that he made no effort to avert the foul and brutal crime. the only shred of excuse which might be offered in his defense is that, blinded by the spell of fanaticism, Cyril considered hypatia to be a sorceress in league with
the Devil. in contrast to the otherwise general excellence of the literary works of Charles
Kingsley maybe noted his puerile delineation of character of Hypatia in his book by that name. Without exception, the meager historical references to this virgin philosopher attest her virtue, integrity, and absolute devotion to the principles of truth and right.
While it is true that the best minds of the Christianity of that period may readily be
absolved from the charge of participes criminis, the implacable hatred of Cyril unquestionably communicated itself to the more fanatical members of his faith, particularly to a group of monks from the nitrian desert. led by Peter the reader, a savage and illiterate
man, they attacked hypatia on the open street as she was passing from the academy to her
home. Dragging the defenseless woman from her chariot, they took her to the Cæsarean Church. tearing away her garments, they pounded her to death with clubs, after which
they scraped the flesh from her bones with oyster shells and carried the mutilated remains to a place called Cindron, where they burned them to ashes.
Thus perished in A.D. 415 the greatest woman initiate of the ancient world, and with
her fell also the neo-Platonic school of alexandria. the memory of hypatia has probably been perpetuated in the hagiolatry of the roman Catholic Church in the person of st.
Catherine of alexandria.
THE COMTE DI CAGLIOSTRO
the “divine” Cagliostro, one moment the idol of Paris, the next a lonely prisoner in a
dungeon of the Inquisition, passed like a meteor across the face of France. According to his memoirs written by him during his confinement in the Bastille, Alessandro Cagliostro was born in malta of a noble but unknown family. he was reared and educated in arabia
under the tutelage of altotas, a man well versed in several branches of philosophy and
science and also a master of the transcendental arts. While Cagliostro’s biographers gener-ally ridicule this account, they utterly fail to advance in its stead any logical solution for the source of his magnificent store of arcane knowledge.
branded as an impostor and a charlatan, his miracles declared to be legerdemain, and his
very generosity suspected of an ulterior motive, the Comte di Cagliostro is undoubtedly the most calumniated man in modem history. “The mistrust,” writes W. H. K. Trowbridge, “that mystery and magic always inspire made Cagliostro with his fantastic personality an easy target for calumny. After having been riddled with abuse till he was unrecognizable, preju-dice, the foster child of calumny, proceeded to lynch him, so to speak. For over one hundred years his character has dangled on the gibbet of infamy, upon which the sbirri of tradition
have inscribed a curse on any one who shall attempt to cut him down. his fate has been his
fame. he is remembered in history, not so much for anything he did, as for what was done
to him.” (See Cagliostro, the Splendour and Misery of a Master of Magic.)