Fishes, Insects, Animals,
Reptiles and Birds
Part One
ThE CrEaturEs inhabitinG thE WatEr, air, and earth were held in
veneration by all races of antiquity. Realizing that visible bodies are only symbols of invisible forces, the ancients worshiped the Divine Power through the
lower kingdoms of nature, because those less evolved and more simply constituted crea-tures responded most readily to the creative impulses of the gods. the sages of old studied living things to a point of realization that God is most perfectly understood through a knowledge of his supreme handiwork – animate and inanimate nature.
Every existing creature manifests some aspect of the intelligence or power of the Eternal one, who can never be known save through a study and appreciation of his numbered
but inconceivable parts. When a creature is chosen, therefore, to symbolize to the concrete human mind some concealed abstract principle it is because its characteristics demon-strate this invisible principle in visible action. Fishes, insects, animals, reptiles, and birds appear in the religious symbolism of nearly all nations, because the forms and habits of these creatures and the media in which they exist closely relate them to the various gen-erative and germinative powers of nature, which were considered as prima-facie evidence
of divine omnipresence.
The early philosophers and scientists, realizing that all life has its origin in water, chose
the fish as the symbol of the life germ. The fact that fishes are most prolific makes the simile still more apt. While the early priests may not have possessed the instruments nec-essary to analyze the spermatozoon, they concluded by deduction that it resembled a fish.
Fishes were sacred to the Greeks and Romans, being connected with the worship of
Aphrodite (Venus). An interesting survival of pagan ritualism is found in the custom of eating fish on Friday. Freya, in whose honor the day was named, was the scandinavian
venus, and this day was sacred among many nations to the goddess of beauty and fecundity. This analogy further links the fish with the procreative mystery. Friday is also sacred to the followers of the Prophet mohammed.
the word nun means both fish and growth, and as Inman says:
“The Jews were led to victory by the Son of the Fish whose other names were
Joshua and Jesus (the Savior). Nun is still the name of a female devotee” of the
Christian faith. Among early Christians three fishes were used to symbolize the Trinity, and the fish is also one of the eight sacred symbols of the great Buddha. It is also significant that the dolphin should be sacred to both Apollo (the Solar

Savior) and Neptune. It was believed that this fish carried shipwrecked sailors to
heaven on its back. the dolphin was accepted by the early Christians as an emblem of Christ, because the pagans had viewed this beautiful creature as a friend and benefactor of man. The heir to the throne of France, the Dauphin, may have
secured his title from this ancient pagan symbol of the divine preservative power. The first advocates of Christianity likened converts to fishes, who at the time of baptism “returned again into the sea of Christ.”
THE FIRST INCARNATION, OR MATSYA A V ATAR, OF VISHNU.From Picart’s Religious Ceremonials.
The fish has often been associated with
the World saviors. vishnu, the hindu
redeemer, who takes upon himself ten forms for the redemption of the universe, was expelled from the mouth of a fish in his first incarnation. Isis, while nursing the infant horus, is often
shown with a fish on her headdress. Oannes, the Chaldean Savior (bor -
rowed from the brahmins), is depicted with the head and body of a fish, from which his human form protrudes at various points. Jesus was often sym-bolized by a fish. He told His disciples that they should became “fishers of men.” The sign of the fish was also the first monogram of the Christians. The mysterious Greek name of Jesus, ΙΧΘΥΣ, means “a fish.” The fish was accepted as a symbol of the Christ by a number of early canonized church fa-thers. st. augustine likened the Christ
to a fish that had been broiled, and it was also pointed out that the flesh of that Fish was the food of righteous and holy men.
Primitive peoples believed the sea and land were inhabited by strange creatures, and
early books on zoology contain curious illustrations of composite beasts, reptiles, and fishes, which did not exist at the time the mediæval authors compiled these voluminous books. in the ancient initiatory rituals of the Persian, Greek, and Egyptian mysteries the
priests disguised themselves as composite creatures, thereby symbolizing different as-pects of human consciousness. they used birds and reptiles as emblems of their various
deities, often creating forms of grotesque appearance and assigning to them imaginary traits, habits, and places of domicile, all of which were symbolic of certain spiritual and

255transcendental truths thus concealed from the profane. the phœnix made its nest of incense and flames. The unicorn had the body of a horse, the feet of an elephant, and the tail
of a wild boar. the upper half of the centaur’ s body was human and the lower half equine.
the pelican of the hermetists fed its young from its own breast, and to this bird were assigned other mysterious attributes which could have been true only allegorically.
though regarded by many writers of the middle ages as actual living creatures, none
of these – the pelican excepted – ever existed outside the symbolism of the mysteries.
Possibly they originated in rumors of animals then little known. in the temple, however,
they became a reality, for there they signified the manifold characteristics of man’s nature.
the mantichora had certain points in common with the hyena; the unicorn may have
been the single-horned rhinoceros. to the student of the secret wisdom these composite
animals. and birds simply represent various forces working in the invisible worlds. this is
a point which nearly all writers on the subject of mediæval monsters seem to have over -
looked. (See Vlyssis Aldrovandi’s Monstrorum Historia, 1642, and Physica Curiosa, by
P. Gaspare Schotto, 1697.)
THE MANTICHORA.
From Redgrove’s Bygone Beliefs .
the most remarkable of allegorical creatures was the mantichora,
which Ctesias describes as having
aflame-colored body, lionlike in shape,
three rows of teeth, a human head and
ears, blue eyes, a tail ending in a series
of spikes and stings, thorny and scorpionlike, and a voice which sounded
like the blare of trumpets. this synthetic quadruped ambled into mediæval works on natural history, but, though seriously considered, had
never been seen, because it inhabited inaccessible regions and consequently was difficult to locate.
there are also legends to the effect that long before the appearance of human beings
there existed a race or species of composite creatures which was destroyed by the gods. The temples of antiquity preserved their own historical records and possessed informa-tion concerning the prehistoric world that has never been revealed to the uninitiated. according to these records, the human race evolved from a species of creature that
partook somewhat of the nature of an amphibian, for at that time primitive man had the gills of a fish and was partly covered with scales. To a limited degree, the human embryo demonstrates the possibility of such a condition. as a result of the theory of
man’s origin in water, the fish was looked upon as the progenitor of the human family. this gave rise to the ichthyolatry of the Chaldeans, Phœnicians, and brahmins. the
american indians believe that the waters of lakes, rivers, and oceans are inhabited by a
mysterious people, the “Water indians.”
The fish has been used as an emblem of damnation; but among the Chinese it typified
contentment and good fortune, and fishes appear on many of their coins. When Typhon, or

256set, the Egyptian evil genius, had divided the body of the god osiris into fourteen parts,
he cast one part into the river nile, where, according to Plutarch, it was devoured by three
fishes – the lepidotus (probably the lepidosiren), the phagrus, and the oxyrynchus (a form
of pike). For this reason the Egyptians would not eat the flesh of these fishes, believing
that to do so would be to devour the body of their god. When used as a symbol of evil, the fish represented the earth (man’s lower nature) and the tomb (the sepulcher of the Myster -
ies). Thus was Jonah three days in the belly of the “great fish,” as Christ was three days in the tomb.
Several early church fathers believed that the “whale” which swallowed Jonah was
the symbol of God the Father, who, when the hapless prophet was thrown overboard, accepted Jonah into His own nature until a place of safety was reached. The story of Jonah is really a legend of initiation into the Mysteries, and the “great fish” represents the darkness of ignorance which engulfs man when he is thrown over the side of the ship (is born) into the sea (life). The custom of building ships in the form of fishes or birds, common in ancient times, could give rise to the story, and mayhap Jonah was merely picked up by another vessel and carried into port, the pattern of the ship causing it to be called a “great fish.” (“Veritatis simplex oratio est!”) more probably the “whale” of
Jonah is based upon the pagan mythological creature, hippocampus, part horse and part
dolphin, for the early Christian statues and carvings show the composite creature and not a true whale.
it is reasonable to suppose that the mysterious sea serpents, which, according to the
mayan and toltec legends, brought the gods to mexico were viking or Chaldean ships,
built in the shape of composite sea monsters or dragons. h. P. blavatsky advances the
theory that the word cetus, the great whale, is derived from keto, a name for the fish god,
Dagon, and that Jonah was actually confined in a cell hollowed out in the body of a gigan-tic statue of Dagon after he had been captured by Phœnician sailors and carried to one of their cities. there is no doubt a great mystery in the gigantic form of cetus, which is still
preserved as a constellation.
According to many scattered fragments extant, man’s lower nature was symbolized by
a tremendous, awkward creature resembling a great sea serpent, or dragon, called leviathan. all symbols having serpentine form or motion signify the solar energy in one of its
many forms. this great creature of the sea therefore represents the solar life force imprisoned in water and also the divine energy coursing through the body of man, where, until transmuted, it manifests itself as a writhing, twisting monster – -man’s greeds, passions, and lusts. among the symbols of Christ as the savior of men are a number relating to the
mystery of His divine nature concealed within the personality of the lowly Jesus.
the Gnostics divided the nature of the Christian redeemer into two parts – the one
Jesus, a mortal man; the other, Christos, a personification of Nous, the principle of Cosmic
mind. Nous, the greater, was for the period of three years (from baptism to crucifixion)
using the fleshly garment of the mortal man (Jesus). In order to illustrate this point and still conceal it from the ignorant, many strange, and often repulsive, creatures were used whose rough exteriors concealed magnificent organisms. Kenealy, in his notes on the Book of Enoch , observes: