Fishes, Insects, Animals,
Reptiles and Birds
Part Two
AS appropriate emblemS of various human and divine attributes birds
were included in religious and philosophic symbolism that of pagans and of Christians alike. Cruelty was signified by the buzzard; courage by the eagle;
self-sacrifice by the pelican; and pride by the peacock. The ability of birds to leave the earth and fly aloft toward the source of light has resulted in their being associated with as-piration, purity, and beauty. Wings were therefore often added to various terrene creatures in an effort to suggest transcendency. because their habitat was among the branches of
the sacred trees in the hearts of ancient forests, birds were also regarded as the appointed messengers of the tree spirits and Nature gods dwelling in these consecrated groves, and through their clear notes the gods themselves were said to speak. many myths have been
fabricated to explain the brilliant plumage of birds. a familiar example is the story of
Juno’s peacock, in whose tail feathers were placed the eyes of argus. Numerous american
indian legends also deal with birds and the origin of the various colors of feathers. the
Navahos declare that when all living things climbed to the stalk of a bamboo to escape the Flood, the wild turkey was on the lowest branch and his tail feathers trailed in the water; hence the color was all washed out.
Gravitation, which is a law in the material world, is the impulse toward the center of
materiality; levitation, which is a law in the spiritual world, is the impulse toward the cen-ter of spirituality. Seeming to be capable of neutralizing the effect of gravity, the bird was said to partake of a nature superior to other terrestrial creation; and its feathers, because of their sustaining power, came to be accepted as symbols of divinity, courage, and accom-plishment. a notable example is the dignity attached to eagle feathers by the american
indians, among whom they are insignia of merit. angels have been invested with wings
because, like birds, they were considered to be the intermediaries between the gods and men and to inhabit the air or middle kingdom betwixt heaven and earth. as the dome of
the heavens was likened to a skull in the Gothic Mysteries, so the birds which flew across the sky were regarded as thoughts of the Deity. For this reason odin’s two messenger ravens were called Hugin and munin – thought and memory.
among the Greeks and romans, the eagle was the appointed bird of Jupiter and consequently signified the swiftly moving forces of the Demiurgus; hence it was looked upon as the mundane lord of the birds, in contradistinction to the phœnix, which was symbolic of the celestial ruler. The eagle typified the sun in its material phase and also the immu -
table Demiurgic law beneath which all mortal creatures must bend. the eagle was also

268the Hermetic symbol of sulphur, and signified the mysterious fire of Scorpio – the most
profoundly significant sign of the zodiac and the Gate of the Great Mystery. being one of
the three symbols of scorpio, the eagle, like the Goat of mendes, was an emblem of the
theurgic art and the secret processes by which the infernal fire of the scorpion was trans-muted into the spiritual light-fire of the gods.
among certain american indian tribes the thunderbird is held in peculiar esteem. this
divine creature is said to live above the clouds; the flapping of its wings causes the rum-bling which accompanies storms, while the flashes from its eyes are the lightning. Birds were used to signify the vital breath; and among the Egyptians, mysterious hawklike birds with human heads, and carrying in their claws the symbols of immortality, are often shown hovering as emblems of the liberated soul over the mummified bodies of the dead. in Egypt the hawk was the sacred symbol of the sun; and ra, osiris, and horns are often
depicted with the heads of hawks. The cock, or rooster, was a symbol of Cashmala (Cad-millus) in the samothracian mysteries, and is also a phallic symbol sacred to the sun. it
was accepted by the Greeks as the emblem of Ares (Mars) and typified watchfulness and defense. When placed in the center of a weather vane it signifies the sun in the midst of the four corners of creation. The Greeks sacrificed a rooster to the gods at the time of enter -
ing the Eleusinian Mysteries. Sir Francis Bacon is supposed to have died as the result of stuffing a fowl with snow. May this not signify Bacon’s initiation into the pagan Mysteries which still existed in his day?
both the peacock and the ibis were objects of veneration because they destroyed the
poisonous reptiles which were popularly regarded as the emissaries of the infernal gods. because of the myriad of eyes in its tail feathers the peacock was accepted as the symbol of wisdom, and on account of its general appearance it was often confused with the fabled phœnix of the Mysteries. There is a curious belief that the flesh of the peacock will not pu-trefy even though kept for a considerable time. as an outgrowth of this belief the peacock
became the emblem of immortality, because the spiritual nature of man – like the flesh of this bird – is incorruptible.
the Egyptians paid divine honors to the ibis and it was a cardinal crime to kill one,
even by accident. it was asserted that the ibis could live only in Egypt and that if transported to a foreign country it would die of grief. the Egyptians declared this bird to be the
preserver of crops and especially worthy of veneration because it drove out the winged serpents of libya which the wind blew into Egypt. the ibis was sacred to thoth, and when
its head and neck were tucked under its wing its body closely resembled a human heart. (See Montfaucon’s Antiquities.) the black and white ibis was sacred to the moon; but all
forms were revered because they destroyed crocodile eggs, the crocodile being a symbol of the detested typhon.
nocturnal birds were appropriate symbols of both sorcery and the secret divine sciences: sorcery because black magic cannot function in the light of truth (day) and is powerful only when surrounded by ignorance (night); and the divine sciences because those pos-sessing the arcana are able to see through the darkness of ignorance and materiality. owls
and bats were consequently often associated with either witchcraft or wisdom. The goose was an emblem of the first primitive substance or condition from which and within which

269the worlds were fashioned. in the mysteries, the universe was likened to an egg which the
Cosmic Goose had laid in space. because of its blackness the crow was the symbol of chaos or the chaotic darkness preceding the light of creation. the grace and purity of the swan
were emblematic of the spiritual grace and purity of the initiate. this bird also represented
the Mysteries which unfolded these qualities in humanity. This explains the allegories of
the gods (the secret wisdom) incarnating in the body of a swan (the initiate).
Being scavengers, the vulture, the buzzard, and the condor signified that form of
divine power which by disposing of refuse and other matter dangerous to the life and health of humanity cleanses and purifies the lower spheres. These birds were there-fore adopted as symbols of the disintegrative processes which accomplish good while apparently destroying, and by some religions have been mistakenly regarded as evil. birds such as the parrot and raven were accorded veneration because, being able to
mimic the human voice, they were looked upon as links between the human and ani-mal kingdoms.
the dove, accepted by Christianity as the emblem of the holy Ghost, is an extremely
ancient and highly revered pagan yonic emblem. in many of the ancient mysteries it
represented the third person of the Creative Triad, or the Fabricator of the world. As the lower worlds were brought into existence through a generative process, so the dove has been associated with those deities identified with the procreative functions. It is sacred to Astarte, Cybele, Isis, Venus, Juno, Mylitta, and Aphrodite. On account of its gentleness and devotion to its young, the dove was looked upon as the embodiment of the maternal instinct. the dove is also an emblem of wisdom, for it represents the power and order by
which the lower worlds are maintained. it has long been accepted as a messenger of the
divine will, and signifies the activity of God.
the name dove has been given to oracles and to prophets.
“the true name of the dove was Ionah or Iönas; it was a very sacred emblem,
and atone time almost universally received; it was adopted by the hebrews; and
the mystic Dove was regarded as a symbol from the days of noah by all those
who were of the Church of God. the prophet sent to ninevah as God’s messenger was called Jonah or the Dove; our Lord’s forerunner, the Baptist, was called in Greek by the name of ioannes; and so was the apostle of love, the author of
the fourth Gospel and of the Apocalypse, named Ioannes.” (Bryant’s Analysis of
Ancient Mythology.)
In Masonry the dove is the symbol of purity and innocence. It is significant that in the
pagan Mysteries the dove of Venus was crucified upon the four spokes of a great wheel, thus foreshadowing the mystery of the crucified Lord of Love. Although Mohammed drove the doves from the temple at mecca, occasionally he is depicted with a dove sitting upon his shoulder as the symbol of divine inspiration. In ancient times the effigies of doves were placed upon the heads of scepters to signify that those bearing them were overshadowed by divine prerogative. In mediæval art, the dove frequently was pictured as an emblem of divine benediction.

THE PHŒNIX
Clement, one of the ante-Nicæan Fathers, describes, in the first century after Christ,
the peculiar nature and habits of the phœnix, in this wise:
“there is a certain bird which is called a Phœnix. this is the only one of its kind
and lives five hundred years. And when the time of its dissolution draws near that
it must die, it builds itself a nest of frankincense, and myrrh, and other spices, into which, when the time is fulfilled, it enters and dies. But as the flesh decays a certain kind of worm is produced, which, being nourished by the juices of the dead bird, brings forth feathers. Then, when it has acquired strength, it takes up that nest in which are the bones of its parent, and bearing these it passes from the land of arabia into Egypt, to the city called Heliopolis. And, in open day, flying in the sight of all men, it places them on the altar of the sun, and having done this, hastens back to its former abode. The priests then inspect the registers of the dates, and find that it has returned exactly as the five hundredth year was completed.”
THE PHŒNIX ON ITS NEST OF FLAMES.From Lycosthenes’ Prodigiorum, ac Os-tentorum Chronicon.
the phœnix is the most celebrated of
all the symbolic creatures fabricated
by the ancient mysteries for the pur -
pose of concealing the great truths of esoteric philosophy. though modern
scholars of natural history declare the existence of the phœnix to be purely mythical, Pliny describes the capture of one of these birds and it exhibition in the Roman Forum during the reign of the Emperor Claudius.
Although admitting that he had not seen the phœnix bird (there being only one alive at
a time), Herodotus amplifies a bit the description given by Clement:
“they tell a story of what this bird does which does not seem to me to be credible: that he comes all the way from arabia, and brings the parent bird, all plastered
with myrrh, to the temple of the sun, and there buries the body. in order to bring
him, they say, he first forms a ball of myrrh as big as he finds that he can carry; then