Flowers, Plants, Fruits,
and Trees
ThE Yoni anD Phallus were worshiped by nearly all ancient peoples as
appropriate symbols of God’s creative power. the Garden of Eden, the ark,
the Gate of the temple, the veil of the mysteries, the vesica piscis or oval nimbus, and the holy Grail are important yonic symbols; the pyramid, the obelisk, the cone,
the candle, the tower, the Celtic monolith, the spire, the campanile, the maypole, and
the sacred spear are symbolic of the phallus. in treating the subject of Priapic worship,
too many modern authors judge pagan standards by their own and wallow in the mire of
self-created vulgarity. the Eleusinian mysteries – the greatest of all the ancient secret societies – established one of the highest known standards of morality and ethics, and those criticizing their use of phallic symbols should ponder the trenchant words of King Edward iii, “Honi soit qui mal y pense .”
the obscene rites practiced by the later bacchanalia and Dionysia were no more representative of the standards of purity originally upheld by the mysteries than the orgies
occasionally occurring among the adherents of Christianity till the eighteenth century were representative of primitive Christianity. sir William hamilton, british minister at
the Court of Naples, declares that in 1780, Isernia, a community of Christians in Italy, worshiped with phallic ceremonies the pagan god Priapus under the name of st. Cosmo.
(See Two Essays on the Worship of Priapus, by Richard Payne Knight.)
Father, mother, and child constitute the natural trinity. The Mysteries glorified the
home as the supreme institution consisting of this trinity functioning as a unit. Pythagoras likened the universe to the family, declaring that as the supreme fire of the universe was in the midst of its heavenly bodies, so, by analogy, the supreme fire of the world was upon its hearthstones. the Pythagorean and other schools of philosophy conceived the one divine nature of God to manifest itself in the threefold aspect of Father, Mother, and Child. These three constituted the Divine Family, whose dwelling place is creation and whose natural and peculiar symbol is the 47th problem of Euclid. God the Father is spirit, God the mother is matter, and God the Child – the product of the two – represents the sum of
living things born out of and constituting nature. the seed of spirit is sown in the womb
of matter, and by an immaculate (pure) conception the progeny is brought into being. Is not this the true mystery of the madonna holding the holy babe in her arms? Who dares
to say that such symbolism is improper? the mystery of life is the supreme mystery,
revealed in all of its divine dignity and glorified as Nature’s per feet achievement by the initiated sages and seers of all ages.
The prudery of today, however, declares this same mystery to be unfit for the consider -
ation of holy-minded people. Contrary to the dictates of reason, a standard has been estab-

282lished which affirms that innocence bred of ignorance is more to be desired than virtue born
of knowledge. Eventually, however, man will learn that he need never be ashamed of truth. until he does learn this, he is false to his God, to his world, and to himself. in this respect,
Christianity has woefully failed in its mission. While declaring man’s body to be the living temple of the living God, in the same breath it asserts the substances and functions of this temple to be unclean and their study defiling to the sensitive sentiments of the righteous. By this unwholesome attitude, man’s body – the house of God – is degraded and defamed. Yet the cross itself is the oldest of phallic emblems, and the lozenge-shaped windows of cathe-drals are proof that yonic symbols have survived the destruction of the pagan mysteries. the
very structure of the church itself is permeated with phallicism. remove from the Christian
Church all emblems of Priapic origin and nothing is left, for even the earth upon which it stands was, because of its fertility, the first yonic symbol. As the presence of these emblems of the generative processes is either unknown or unheeded by the majority, the irony of the situation is not generally appreciated. only those conversant with the secret language of
antiquity are capable of understanding the divine significance of these emblems.
Flowers were chosen as symbols for many reasons. The great variety of flora made it
possible to find some plant or flower which would be a suitable figure for nearly any ab-stract quality or condition. A plant might be chosen because of some myth connected with its origin, as the stories of Daphne and narcissus; because of the peculiar environment in which it thrived, as the orchid and the fungus; because of its significant shape, as the pas-sion flower and the Easter lily; because of its brilliance or fragrance, as the verbena and the sweet lavender; because it preserved its form indefinitely, as the everlasting flower; because of unusual characteristics as the sunflower and heliotrope, which have long been sacred because of their affinity for the sun.
the plant might also be considered worthy of veneration because from its crushed leaves,
petals, stalks, or roots could be extracted healing unctions, essences, or drugs affecting the nature and intelligence of human beings – such as the poppy and the ancient herbs of proph-ecy. The plant might also be regarded as efficacious in the cure of many diseases because its fruit, leaves, petals, or roots bore a resemblance in shape or color to parts or organs of the human body. For example, the distilled juices of certain species of ferns, also the hairy moss growing upon oaks, and the thistledown were said to have the power of growing hair; the dentaria, which resembles a tooth in shape, was said to cure the toothache; and the palma
Christi plant, because of its shape, cured all afflictions of the hands.
the blossom is really the reproductive system of the plant and is therefore singularly
appropriate as a symbol of sexual purity – an absolute requisite of the ancient Mysteries. Thus the flower signifies this ideal of beauty and regeneration which must ultimately take the place of lust and degeneracy.
Of all symbolic flowers the locus blossom of India and Egypt and the rose of the
Rosicrucians are the most important. In their symbolism these two flowers are considered identical. the esoteric doctrines for which the Eastern lotus stands have been perpetuated
in modern Europe under the form of the rose. the rose and the lotus are yonic emblems,
signifying primarily the maternal creative mystery, while the Easter lily is considered to be phallic.

283the brahmin and Egyptian initiates, who undoubtedly understood the secret systems
of spiritual culture whereby the latent centers of cosmic energy in man may be stimulated, employed the lotus blossoms to represent the spinning vortices of spiritual energy located at various points along the spinal column and called chakras, or whirling wheels,
by the hindus. seven of these chakras are of prime importance and have their individual
correspondences in the nerve ganglia and plexuses. according to the secret schools, the
sacral ganglion is called the four-petaled lotus; the prostatic plexus, the six-petaled lo-tus; the epigastric plexus and navel, the ten-petaled lotus; the cardiac plexus, the twelve-petaled lotus; the pharyngeal plexus, the sixteen-petaled locus; the cavern-ous plexus, the two-petaled lotus; and the pineal gland or adjacent unknown center, the thousand-petaled locus. The color, size, and number of petals upon the lotus are the keys to its sym-bolic import. a hint concerning the
unfoldment of spiritual understand-ing according to the secret science of the mysteries is found in the story of
aaron’s rod that budded, and also in Wagner’s great opera, Tannhäuser,
where the budding staff of the Pope signifies the unfolding blossoms upon the sacred rod of the mysteries – the
spinal column.
THE TREE OF THE
KNIGHTS OF THE ROUND TABLE.
this remarkable example of the use of
the tree in symbolism is from the Chateau
de Pierrefonds in the little town of Pier -
refonds, northern France. The eight side
branches end in conventional cup-like
flowers, from each of which rises the body
of a knight carrying in his hand a ribbon
bearing his name. the central stem is sur -
mounted by a larger flower, from which
emerges the body of King Arthur himself.
the tree is a favorite motif in heraldry. the
one trunk with its multitude of branches
caused the tree to be frequently used in
diagramming family lineage, from which
practice has arisen the custom of terming
such tables “family trees.”

284the rosicrucians used a garland of roses to signify the same spiritual vortices, which
are referred to in the bible as the seven lamps of the candlestick and the seven churches
of Asia. In the 1642 edition of Sir Francis Bacon’s History of Henry the Seventh is a frontispiece showing lord bacon with rosicrucian roses for shoe buckles.
in the hindu system of philosophy, each petal of the lotus bears a certain symbol which
gives an added clue to the meaning of the flower. The Orientals also used the lotus plant to
signify the growth of man through the three periods of human consciousness – ignorance, endeavor, and understanding. As the lotus exists in three elements (earth, water, and air) so man lives in three worlds – material, intellectual, and spiritual. as the plant, with its
roots in the mud and the slime, grows upward through the water and finally blossoms forth in the light and air, so the spiritual growth of man is upward from the darkness of base action and desire into the light of truth and understanding, the water serving as a symbol of the ever-changing world of illusion through which the soul must pass in its struggle to reach the state of spiritual illumination. The rose and its Eastern equivalent, the lotus, like all beautiful flowers, represent spiritual unfoldment and attainment: hence, the Eastern deities are often shown seated upon the open petals of the lotus blossoms.
the lotus was also a universal motif in Egyptian art and architecture. the roofs of
many temples were upheld by lotus columns, signifying the eternal wisdom; and the lotus-headed scepter – symbolic of self-unfoldment and divine prerogative – was often carried in religious processions. When the flower had nine petals, it was symbolic of man; when twelve, of the universe and the gods; when seven, of the planets and the law; when five, of the senses and the mysteries; and when three, of the chief deities and the worlds. the
heraldic rose of the Middle Ages generally has either five or ten petals thereby showing its relationship to the spiritual mystery of man through the Pythagorean pentad and decad.
CULTUS ARBORUM
the worship of trees as proxies of Divinity was prevalent throughout the ancient
world. temples were often built in the heart of sacred groves, and nocturnal ceremonials
were conducted under the wide-spreading branches of great trees, fantastically decorated and festooned in honor of their patron deities. in many instances the trees themselves were
believed to possess the attributes of divine power and intelligence, and therefore suppli-cations were often addressed to them. the beauty, dignity, massiveness, and strength of
oaks, elms, and cedars led to their adoption as symbols of power, integrity, permanence, virility, and divine protection.
several ancient peoples – notably the hindus and scandinavians – -regarded the macrocosm, or Grand universe, as a divine tree growing from a single seed sown in space. the
Greeks, Persians, Chaldeans, and Japanese have legends describing the axle tree or reed upon which the earth revolves. Kapila declares the universe to be the eternal tree, Brahma, which springs from an imperceptible and intangible seed – the material monad. The mediæval Qabbalists represented creation as a tree with its roots in the reality of spirit and its branches in the illusion of tangible existence. the sephirothic tree of the Qabbalah was therefore inverted, with its roots in heaven and its branches upon the earth. madam blavatsky notes that