Freemasonic Symbolism
In sEvEral Earl Y masoniC manusCriPts – for example, the harleian, Sloane, Lansdowne, and Edinburgh-Kilwinning – it is stated that the craft
of initiated builders existed before the Deluge, and that its members were employed in the building of the Tower of Babel. A Masonic Constitution dated 1701 gives the following naive account of the origin of the sciences, arts, and crafts from which the major part of masonic symbolism is derived:
“How this worthy Science was first begunne, I shall tell. Before Noah’s Flood,
there was a man called Lameck as it is written in the 4 Chap. of Gen.: and this lameck had two Wives. the one was called adah, and the other Zillah; by the
first wife Adah he gott two Sons, the one called Jaball, and the other Juball, and by the other wife Zillah he got a son and Daughter, and the four children found the
beginning of all Crafts in the world. This Jaball was the elder Son, and he found the Craft of Geometric, and he parted flocks, as of Sheep and Lambs in the fields, and first wrought Houses of Stone and Tree, as it is noted in the Chap, aforesaid, and his Brother Juball found the crafte of Musick, of Songs, Organs and Harp. The Third Brother [Tubal-cain] found out Smith’s craft to work Iron and steel, and their sister naamah found out the art of Weaving. these children did know thatt God
would take Vengeance for Sinne, either by fire or water, wherefor they wrote these sciences which they had found in two Pillars of stone, thatt they might be found
after the Flood. The one stone was called Marbell – cannott burn with Fire, and the other was called Laturus [brass?], thatt cannott drown in the Water.”
the author of this Constitution there upon declares that one of these pillars was later
discovered by hermes, who communicated to mankind the secrets thereon inscribed.
in his Antiquities of the Jews, Josephus writes that Adam had forewarned his descendants that sinful humanity would be destroyed by a deluge. in order to preserve their science and philosophy, the children of seth there fore raised two pillars, one of brick and
the other of stone, on which were inscribed the keys to their knowledge. the Patriarch
Enoch – whose name means the Initiator – is evidently a personification of the sun, since he lived 365 years. He also constructed an underground temple consisting of nine vaults, one beneath the other, placing in the deepest vault a triangular tablet of gold bearing upon it the absolute and ineffable name of Deity. according to some accounts, Enoch made two
golden deltas. the larger he placed upon the white cubical altar in the lowest vault and the
smaller he gave into the keeping of his son, methuseleh, who did the actual construction
work of the brick chambers according to the pattern revealed to his father by the most
High. In the form and arrangement of these vaults Enoch epitomized the nine spheres of

577the ancient mysteries and the nine sacred strata of the earth through which the initiate
must pass to reach the flaming Spirit dwelling in its central core.
According to Freemasonic symbolism, Enoch, fearing that all knowledge of the sacred
mysteries would be lost at the time of the Deluge, erected the two columns mentioned
in the quotation. Upon the metal column in appropriate allegorical symbols he engraved the secret reaching and upon the marble column placed an inscription stating that a short distance away a priceless treasure would be discovered in a subterranean vault. after having thus faithfully completed his labors, Enoch was translated from the brow of mount
moriah. in time the location of the secret vaults was lost, but after the lapse of ages there
came another builder – an initiate after the order of Enoch – and he, while laying the foun-dations for another temple to the Great architect of the universe, discovered the long-lost
vaults and the secrets contained within.
John Leylande was appointed by King Henry VIII to go through the archives of the
various religious institutions dissolved by the king and remove for preservation any books or manuscripts of an important character. among the documents copied by leylande was
a series of questions and answers concerning the mystery of Masonry written by King Henry VI. In answer to the question, “How came Masonry into England?” the document states that Peter Gower, a Grecian, traveled for knowledge in Egypt, syria, and every land
where the Phœnicians had planted masonry; winning entrance in all lodges of masons, he
learned much, and returning, dwelt in Greater Greece. he became renowned for his wisdom, formed a great lodge at Groton, and made many masons, some of whom journeyed
in France, spreading Masonry there; from France in the course of time the order passed into England.
To even the superficial student of the subject it must be evident that the name of Peter
Gower, the Grecian, is merely an Anglicized form of Pythagoras; consequently Groton,
where he formed his lodge, is easily identified with Crotona. A link is thus established between the philosophic Mysteries of Greece and mediæval Freemasonry. In his notes on King Henry’s questions and answers, William Preston enlarges upon the vow of secrecy as it was practiced by the ancient initiates. on the authority of Pliny he describes how
anaxarchus, having been imprisoned in order to extort from him some of the secrets with which he had been entrusted, bit out his own tongue and threw it in the face of nicocreon,
the tyrant of Cyprus. Preston adds that the Athenians revered a brazen statue that was represented without a tongue to denote the sanctity with which they regarded their oath-bound secrets. It is also noteworthy that, according to King Henry’s manuscript, Masonry had its origin in the East and was the carrier of the arts and sciences of civilization to the primitive humanity of the western nations.
Conspicuous among the symbols of Freemasonry are the seven liberal arts and scienc -
es. by grammar man is taught to express in noble and adequate language his innermost
thoughts and ideals; by rhetoric he is enabled to conceal his ideals under the protecting
cover of ambiguous language and figures of speech; by logic he is trained in the organiza -
tion of the intellectual faculties with which he has been endowed; by arithmetic he not
only is instructed in the mystery of universal order but also gains the key to multitude, magnitude, and proportion; by geometry he is inducted into the mathematics of form,

578the harmony and rhythm of angles, and the philosophy of organization; by music he is
reminded that the universe is founded upon the laws of celestial harmonics and that harmony and rhythm are all-pervading; by astronomy he gains an understanding of the immensities of time and space, of the proper relationship between himself and the universe, and of the awesomeness of that unknown Power which is driving the countless stars of
the firmament through illimitable space. Equipped with the knowledge conferred by fa-miliarity with the liberal arts and sciences, the studious Freemason therefore finds himself confronted by few problems with which he cannot cope.
THE MYSTERY OF THE MACROCOSM.
redrawn from Cesariano’ s Edition of Vitruvius.
Summarizing the relationship between the human body and the theory of architectonics, Vitruvius writes:
“since nature has designed the human body so that its members are duly proportioned to the
frame as a whole, it appears that the ancients had good reason for their rule, that in perfect building the different members must be in exact symmetrical relations to the whole general scheme. hence,

579while transmitting to us the proper arrangements for buildings of all kinds, they were particularly
careful to do so in the case of temples of the gods, buildings in which merits and faults usually last forever. (...) Therefore, if it is agreed that number was found out from the human fingers, and that there is a symmetrical correspondent between the members separately and the entire form of the body, in accordance with a certain part selected as standard, we can have nothing but respect for those who, in constructing temples of the immortal gods, have so arranged the members of the works that both the separate parts and the whole design may harmonize in their proportions and symmetry.” (See The Ten Books on Architecture)
by some it is believed that st. Paul was initiated into the Dionysiac mysteries, for in the tenth verse of
the third chapter of First Corinthians he calls himself a “master-builder” or adept: “According to the grace of God which is given into me, as a wise master-builder, i have laid the foundation and another buildeth
thereon.” as survivals of the ancient Dionysiac rites, the two diagrams of Cesariano, accompanying this
chapter are of incalculable value to the modern mystic architect.
THE DIONYSIAC ARCHITECTS
the most celebrated of the ancient fraternities of artisans was that of the Dionysiac architects. This organization was composed exclusively of initiates of the Bacchus-Dionys-os cult and was peculiarly consecrated to the science of building and the art of decoration. acclaimed as being the custodians of a secret and sacred knowledge of architectonics, its members were entrusted with the design and erection of public buildings and monu-ments. the superlative excellence of their handiwork elevated the members of the guild to
a position of surpassing dignity; they were regarded as the master craftsmen of the earth. Because of the first dances held in honor of Dionysos, he was considered the founder and patron of the theater, and the Dionysians specialized in the construction of buildings adapted for the presentation of dramatic performances. in the circular or semicircular
orchestra they invariably erected an altar to Æschylus, the famous Greek poet, that while appearing in one of his own plays he was suspected by a mob of angry spectators of re-vealing one of the profound secrets of the mysteries and was forced to seek refuge at the
altar of Dionysos.
so carefully did the Dionysiac architects safeguard the secrets of their craft that only
fragmentary records exist of their esoteric teachings. John A. Weisse thus sums up the meager data available concerning the order:
“They made their appearance certainly not later than 1000 B.C., and appear
to have enjoyed particular privileges and immunities. they also possessed secret
means of recognition, and were bound together by special ties only known to them-selves. the richer of this fraternity were bound to provide for their poorer brethren. they were divided into communities, governed by a master and Wardens,
and called γυνοικιαι (connected houses). They held a grand festival annually, and were held in high esteem. their ceremonials were regarded as sacred. it has been
claimed that Solomon, at the instance of Hiram, King of Tyre, employed them at his temple and palaces. they were also employed at the construction of the temple