93The Life and Teachings of
Thoth Hermes Trismegistus
THUNDER ROLLED, LIGHTNING FLASHED, the veil of the Temple was rent
from top to bottom. The venerable initiator, in his robes of blue and gold, slowly raised his jeweled wand and pointed with it into the darkness revealed by the
tearing of the silken curtain:
“Behold the Light of Egypt!“
The candidate, in his plain white robe, gazed into the utter blackness framed by the
two great Lotus-headed columns between which the veil had hung. As he watched, a lumi-nous haze distributed itself throughout the atmosphere until the air was a mass of shining particles. The face of the neophyte was illumined by the soft glow as he scanned the shim-mering cloud for some tangible object. The initiator spoke again:
“This Light which ye behold is the secret luminance of the Mysteries. Whence
it comes none knoweth, save the ‘Master of the Light.’ Behold Him!”
Suddenly, through the gleaming mist a figure appeared, surrounded by a flickering
greenish sheen. The initiator lowered his wand and, bowing his head, placed one hand edgewise against his breast in humble salutation. The neophyte stepped back in awe, part-ly blinded by the glory of the revealed figure. Gaining courage, the youth gazed again at the Divine One. The Form before him was considerably larger than that of a mortal man. The body seemed partly transparent so that the heart and brain could be seen pulsating and radiant. As the candidate watched, the heart changed into an ibis, and the brain into a flashing emerald. In Its hand this mysterious Being bore a winged rod, entwined with serpents. The aged initiator, raising his wand, cried out in a loud voice:
“All hail Thee, Thoth Hermes, Thrice Greatest; all hail Thee, Prince of Men;
all hail Thee who standeth upon the head of Typhon!”
At the same instant a lurid writhing dragon appeared – a hideous monster, part serpent, part crocodile, and part hog. From its mouth and nostrils poured sheets of flame and horrible sounds echoed through the vaulted chambers. Suddenly Hermes struck the advancing reptile with the serpent-wound staff and with snarling cry the dragon fell over upon its side, while the flames about it slowly died away. Hermes placed His foot upon the skull of the vanquished Typhon. The next instant, with a blaze of unbearable glory that

94sent the neophyte staggering backward against a pillar, the immortal Hermes, followed by
streamers of greenish mist, passed through the chamber and faded into nothingness.
SUPPOSITIONS CONCERNING
THE IDENTITY OF HERMES
iamblichus averred that hermes was the author of twenty thousand books; manetho increased the number to more than thirty-six thousand (see James Gardner) – figures which make it evident that a solitary individual, even though he be overshadowed by divine pre-rogative, could scarcely have accomplished such a monumental labor. among the arts and
sciences which it is affirmed Hermes revealed to mankind were medicine, chemistry, law, arc, astrology, music, rhetoric, Magic, philosophy, geography, mathematics (especially geometry), anatomy, and oratory. orpheus was similarly acclaimed by the Greeks.
HERMES MERCURIUSTRISMEGISTUS.From Historia Deorum Fatidicorum.
master of all arts and sciences. perfect
in all crafts, ruler of the three Worlds,
Scribe of the Gods, and Keeper of the books of life, thoth hermes trismegistus – the three times Greatest,
the “First Intelligencer” – was re -
garded by the ancient Egyptians as the embodiment of the universal mind. While in all probability there actually existed a great sage and educator by the name of hermes, it is impossible to extricate the historical man from the mass of legendary accounts which at-tempt to identify him with the Cosmic Principle of thought.
in his Biographia Antiqua , Francis Barrett says of Hermes:
“(...) if God ever appeared in man, he appeared in him, as is evident both from
his books and his Pymander; in which works he has communicated the sum of the abyss, and the divine knowledge to all posterity; by which he has demonstrated

95himself to have been not only an inspired divine, but also a deep philosopher, obtaining his wisdom from God and heavenly things, and not from man.”
His transcendent learning caused Hermes to be identified with many of the early sages
and prophets. in his ancient mythology, bryant writes:
“i have mentioned that Cadmus was the same as the Egyptian thoth; and it is
manifest from his being hermes, and from the invention of letters being attributed
to him. “ (In the chapter on the theory of Pythagorean Mathematics will be found
the table of the original Cadmean letters.)
Investigators believe that it was Hermes who was known to the Jews as “Enoch,” called
by Kenealy the “Second Messenger of God.” Hermes was accepted into the mythology of the Greeks, later becoming the mercury of the latins. he was revered through the form
of the planet mercury because this body is nearest to the sun: hermes of all creatures was
nearest to God, and became known as the messenger of the Gods.
in the Egyptian drawings of him, thoth carries a waxen writing tablet and serves as
the recorder during the weighing of the souls of the dead in the judgment hall of osiris – a
ritual of great significance. Hermes is of first importance to Masonic scholars, because he was the author of the masonic initiatory rituals, which were borrowed from the mysteries
established by hermes. nearly all of the masonic symbols are hermetic in character. Py-thagoras studied mathematics with the Egyptians and from them gained his knowledge of the symbolic geometric solids. hermes is also revered for his reformation of the calendar
system. He increased the year from 360 to 365 days, thus establishing a precedent which still prevails. the appellation “thrice Greatest” was given to hermes because he was
considered the greatest of all philosophers, the greatest of all priests, and the greatest of all kings. it is worthy of note that the last poem of america’s beloved poet, henry Wadsworth
Longfellow, was a lyric ode to Hermes. (See Chambers’ Encyclopædia.)
THE MUTILATED HERMETIC FRAGMENTS
On the subject of the Hermetic books, James Campbell Brown, in his History of Chemistry, has written:
“leaving the Chaldean and earliest Egyptian periods, of which we have remains but no record, and from which no names of either chemists or philosophers have come down to us, we now approach the historic Period, when books were
written, not at first upon parchment or paper, but upon papyrus. A series of early Egyptian books is attributed to hermes trismegistus, who may have been a real savant, or may be a personification of a long succession of writers. (...) He is identi -
fied by some with the Greek god Hermes, and the Egyptian Thoth or Tuti, who was the moon-god, and is represented in ancient paintings as ibis-headed with the disc and crescent of the moon. the Egyptians regarded him as the god of wisdom, let-

96ters, and the recording of time. It is in consequence of the great respect entertained
for hermes by the old alchemists that chemical writings were called ‘hermetic,’
and that the phrase ‘hermetically sealed’ is still in use to designate the closing of a glass vessel by fusion, after the manner of chemical manipulators. We find the same root in the hermetic medicines of Paracelsus, and the hermetic freemasonry of the middle ages.”
among the fragmentary writings believed to have come from the stylus of hermes are
two famous works. The first is the Emerald Table, and the second is the Divine Pymander,
or, as it is more commonly called, The Shepherd of Men, a discussion of which follows.
one outstanding point in connection with hermes is that he was one of the few philosopher-priests of pagandom upon whom the early Christians did not vent their spleen. some
Church Fathers went so far as to declare that Hermes exhibited many symptoms of intel -
ligence, and that if he had only been born in a more enlightened age so that he might have benefited by their instructions he would have been a really great man!
in his Stromata, Clement of alexandria, one of the few chroniclers of pagan lore
whose writings have been preserved to this age, gives practically all the information that is known concerning the original forty-two books of hermes and the importance with
which these books were regarded by both the temporal and spiritual powers of Egypt. Clement describes one of their ceremonial processions as follows:
“For the Egyptians pursue a philosophy of their own. This is principally shown
by their sacred ceremonial. For first advances the Singer, bearing some one of the symbols of music. For they say that he must learn two of the books of Hermes, the one of which contains the hymns of the gods, the second the regulations for the king’s life. and after the singer advances the astrologer, with a horologe in his
hand, and a palm, the symbols of astrology. he must have the astrological books
of hermes, which are four in number, always in his mouth. of these, one is about
the order of the fixed stars that are visible, and another about the conjunctions and luminous appearances of the sun and moon; and the rest respecting their risings. next in order advances the sacred scribe, with wings on his head, and in his hand
a book and rule, in which were writing ink and the reed, with which they write. And he must be acquainted with what are called hieroglyphics, and know about cosmography and geography, the position of the sun and moon, and about the five planets; also the description of Egypt, and the chart of the nile; and the description
of the equipment of the priests and of the place consecrated to them, and about the measures and the things in use in the sacred rites. then the stole-keeper follows
those previously mentioned, with the cubit of justice and the cup for libations. he is
acquainted with all points called Pædeutic (relating to training) and Moschophaltic (sacrificial). There are also ten books which relate to the honour paid by them to their gods, and containing the Egyptian worship; as that relating to sacrifices, first-fruits, hymns, prayers, processions, festivals, and the like. and behind all walks
the Prophet, with the water-vase carried openly in his arms; who is followed by