THE HERMETIC AND ALCHEMICAL
FIGURES OF
CLAUDIUS DE DOMINICO
CELENTANO VALLIS NOVI
From a Manuscript
Written and Illuminated
at Naples A.D. 1606
NO BETTER WAY CAN BE FOUND of introducing to the “ royal art” a
seeker after the mysteries of symbolical philosophy than to place at his
disposal an actual example of alchemical writing. the text of this manuscript is as enigmatic as are its diagrams; but to him who will meditate upon the profound significance of both, the deeper issues of mysticism in due time will be made clear. an unknown person through whose hands this manuscript passed wrote
thus of it:
“because of its drawings and illustrated expositions, the manuscript is of
preeminent importance to the rosicrucians and the contemporary order of
Freemasons. The first, and larger, part of the illustrations deals with the Her -
metic philosophy, explaining its teachings and doctrines. interspersed among
these are portraits of great teachers and satirical representations of bunglers and their mistaken views. the systematically arranged part shows with wonderful clearness the color development of the alchemical processes from blue-gold over black to white and rose. Throughout it treats of the change in
human beings and not of the making of gold. Ever upon the Grade of black
(the return into Chaos from which new creations are possible) follows the Grade of the neophytes, the new birth, which is often repeated with impressive lucidity. the black stage occurs as usual through fire. this unopened and
unpublished manuscript belongs to the order of the most important Precepts and Documents of the Rosicrucians, and Freemasons. A search through the museums and library collections of Germany has failed to reveal any item of even a similar character.”

In addition to the 26 leaves here reproduced there are ten bottles or retorts, each
half filled with varicolored substances. these bottles can be so easily described
that it is unnecessary to reproduce them. The first bottle (from the mouth of which
issues a golden shrub with three blossoms) contains a bluish-gray liquid, the entire figure being called “our Quicksilver.” under the vessel is a verse containing the
significant words:
“he will have white garments for black and then red.” the second bottle
(from the neck of which rise four golden flowers) also contains the blu-ish-gray substance termed quicksilver. Below the bottle is the admonition to “make spirit of the body and grace of the gross, that the corporeal may become incorporeal.”
the third bottle is entirely black save for a golden tree trunk having six loppedoff branches and terminating in five branches which end in knobs and protrude from the neck of the bottle. the state of the substance is termed “blackness showing through the head of the raven.” under the bottle occurs the statement that “the
tincture of the Philosophers is hidden in the air like the soul in the human body.” the fourth bottle is of the deepest blackness and is called “ the head of the r aven.”
Nothing rises from the neck of the vessel, for the earth (its contents) is described as “submerged in Chaos.” the bottom of the fifth bottle contains a bluish-gray, spotted liquid, the upper part being filled with a brick-colored substance. Above are the words: “sixth raven’s head”; below is added: “at the bottom of the vessel worms
are born.”
The lower half of the sixth bottle is of a bluish-gray, the u per half black, the entire figure being termed “seventh raven’s head.” a child is seated beside the bottle, concerning
whom it is written: “this newly-born, black son is called Elixir and will be made perfectly white.” the seventh bottle is black below and black spotted with red above. the process
is thus described:
“black blacker than black, for many divers colors will appear. those black
clouds will [descend] to the body whence they came, and the junction of body, soul, and spirit has been completed and turned to ashes.”
The eighth bottle is divided horizontally by a golden band, from which rises a golden stem ending in five leaves protruding from the neck of the bottle. The contents of the vessel are transparent, and it is written that “the black clouds are past and the great whiteness has been completed.” The ninth bottle (from the neck of which rises a golden white rose) is also partly filled with a transparent liquid. The rose is made to say: “He who blanches me makes me red.” the tenth and last bottle represents the consummation
of the Great Work. The lower half of the vessel is filled with the blood-red Elixir and from the neck rises a red rose with many petals and of extreme beauty. after declaring

510all the planets to have been present at the consummation of the Great Work, the author
of the document concludes:
“I gave to the Master [spirit] so much silver and gold that be can never be poor .”
in his dedication the author and illustrator of the manuscript declares that he has set
forth all the operations of the Great Work. he prays to the holy spirit that he may be included in the number of those who have pursued this most noble of the sciences and that he may be set always in the path of righteousness. Exclusive of his own researches, the main sources of his information are said to be the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas, Ray-mond lully, and arnold of villa nova.
To protect themselves from the persecution of despotic theology the mediæval
alchemists couched their philosophy in Christian terminology, although the great se-crets of the art were derived largely from Egyptian or arabian adepts. the mohammedans were masters of the hermetic secrets and even the great Paracelsus secured
from them the major part of his knowledge. in their manifestoes the rosicrucians also
disclose the arabian source of their secret doctrine. hence it should be borne in mind
that the relating of the alchemical teachings to biblical symbolism was a gesture of
expediency. in their search of the scriptures for the arcana of israel, the Qabbalists
substantiated in great measure the alchemical interpretations of the bible, for the soul
of alchemy is one with that of Qabbalism. both schools have a common end, being
who concerned with the mystery of human regeneration, despite apparent discrepan-cies in their symbolism.
the publication of this manuscript places at the student’s disposal the most profound secrets of the Hermetic Art. At first the task of decipherment may seem hope-less and the superficially-minded will be tempted to scoff at the possibility of real knowledge being perpetuated in such unconventional fashion. the scoffer will not
realize that one of the purposes of the document is to awaken ridicule and thus pre-serve more effectually its arcana from the profane. A few sheets (such as those here reproduced) represent the life work of one who has consecrated himself to the task of tearing aside the veil of the World virgin. Years of research and experimentation,
days of incessant labor, nights of prayer and meditation, and at last comes the real-ization of accomplishment! This is the real story told by the grotesque figures drawn so painstakingly upon the faded, worm-eaten pages. those who have glimpsed the
greater realities of being realize that the fundamental verities of life find at best only imperfect expression through physical symbols. only those who have passed through
the travail of spiritual birth can adequately comprehend and properly reverence the pathetic efforts to portray for others that knowledge necessarily locked within the heart of the one who knows.

Leaf 1. the top line reads: “our earliest medicine was made of natural objects.” about
the king and queen appears the statement that to them a son shall be born “in two trees of
the vine,” resembling his father and without equal in all the world. About the vase is writ-ten: “Green and white.” “The vase flame color, the flowers green.” “Our water, our silver.” the lines below read: “the material of the Philosopher’s stone is that thick, viscous water, which either heat or cold congeals. it is mercury boiled down and thickened, cooked
in neutral earth with sulphurous heat and is called the Prime material of the metals. in
caverns yet dark, and forbidding mountains, if a stone be found which a thousand years
ago Nature made out of her fruits, it will bring him that has it out of trouble. (...) Listen carefully to all my verses; i speak them without veil and without deception.