227The Hiramic Legend
WhEn SOLOMON – THE BELOVED OF GOD, builder of the Everlasting
House, and Grand Master of the Lodge of Jerusalem – ascended the throne of
his father David he consecrated his life to the erection of a temple to God and
a palace for the kings of Israel. David’s faithful friend, Hiram, King of Tyre, hearing that a son of David sat upon the throne of israel, sent messages of congratulation and offers
of assistance to the new ruler. in his History of the Jews, Josephus mentions that copies
of the letters passing between the two kings were then to be seen both at Jerusalem and at tyre. Despite hiram’s lack of appreciation for the twenty cities of Galilee which solomon
presented to him upon the completion of the temple, the two monarchs remained the best of friends. both were famous for their wit and wisdom, and when they exchanged letters
each devised puzzling questions to test the mental ingenuity of the other. Solomon made an agreement with hiram of tyre promising vast amounts of barley, wheat, corn, wine,
and oil as wages for the masons and carpenters from Tyre who were to assist the Jews in the erection of the temple. Hiram also supplied cedars and other fine trees, which were made into rafts and floated down the sea to Joppa, whence they were taken inland by Solo-mon’s workmen to the temple site.
because of his great love for solomon, hiram of tyre sent also the Grand master of
the Dionysiac Architects, CHiram Abiff, a Widow’s Son, who had no equal among the craftsmen of the earth. Chiram is described as being “a tyrian by birch, but of israelitish
descent,” and “a second Bezaleel, honored by his king with the title of Father.” The Freemason’ s Pocket Companion (published in 1771) describes CHiram as “the most cunning, skilful and curious workman that ever lived, whose abilities were not confined to building alone, but extended to all kinds of work, whether in gold, silver, brass or iron; whether in linen, tapestry, or embroidery; whether considered as an architect, statuary [sic]; founder or designer, separately or together, he equally excelled. From his designs, and under his direction, all the rich and splendid furniture of the temple and its several appendages were
begun, carried on, and finished. Solomon appointed him, in his absence, to fill the chair, as Deputy Grand-master; and in his presence, senior Grand-Warden, master of work, and
general overseer of all artists, as well those whom David had formerly procured from tyre
and Sidon, as those Hiram should now send.” (Modem Masonic writers differ as to the accuracy of the last sentence.)
although an immense amount of labor was involved in its construction, solomon’s
temple – in the words of George oliver – “was only a small building and very inferior
in point of size to some of our churches.” The number of buildings contiguous to it and the vast treasure of gold and precious stones used in its construction concentrated a great amount of wealth within the temple area. in the midst of the temple stood the holy of
holies, sometimes called the oracle. it was an exact cube, each dimension being twenty

228cubits, and exemplified the influence of Egyptian symbolism. The buildings of the temple
group were ornamented with 1,453 columns of Parian marble, magnificently sculptured, and 2,906 pilasters decorated with capitals. There was a broad porch facing the east, and the sanctum sanctorum was upon the west. according to tradition, the various buildings
and courtyards could hold in all 300,000 persons. Both the Sanctuary and the Holy of holies were entirely lined with solid gold plates encrusted with jewels.
King Solomon began the building of the temple in the fourth year of his reign on what
would be, according to modern calculation, the 21st day of April, and finished it in the eleventh year of his reign on the 23rd day of October. The temple was begun in the 480th year after the children of israel had passed the red sea. Part of the labor of construction
included the building of an artificial foundation on the brow of Mount Moriah. The stones for the temple were hoisted from quarries directly beneath Mount Moriah and were trued before being brought to the surface. the brass and golden ornaments for the temple were
cast in molds in the clay ground between succoth and Zeredatha, and the wooden parts
were all finished before they reached the temple site. The building was put together, con-sequently, without sound and without instruments, all its parts fitting exactly “without the hammer of contention, the axe of division, or any tool of mischief.”
anderson’s much-discussed Constitutions of the Free-Masons, published in london
in 1723, and reprinted by Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia in 1734, thus describes the division of the laborers engaged in the building of the Everlasting house:
“But Dagon’s Temple, and the finest structures of Tyre and Sidon, could not be
compared with the Eternal God’s Temple at Jerusalem, (...) there were employed about it no less than 3,600 Princes, or Master-Masons, to conduct the work ac-cording to Solomon’s directions, with 80,000 hewers of stone in the mountain, or Fellow Craftsmen, and 70,000 labourers, in all 153,600 besides the levy under Adoniram to work in the mountains of Lebanon by turns with the Sidonians, viz., 30,000, being in all 183,600.”
Daniel Sickels gives 3,300 overseers, instead of 3,600, and lists the three Grand Masters separately. the same author estimates the cost of the temple at nearly four thousand
millions of dollars.
the masonic legend of the building of solomon’s temple does not in every particular
parallel the scriptural version, especially in those portions relating to Chiram abiff. according to the biblical account, this master workman returned to his own country; in the
masonic allegory he is foully murdered. on this point a. E. Waite, in his New Encyclopædia of Freemasonry, makes the following explanatory comment:
“the legend of the master-builder is the great allegory of masonry. it happens that his figurative story is grounded on the fact of a personality mentioned in holy scripture, but this historical background is of the accidents and not the
essence; the significance is in the allegory and not in any point of history which may lie behind it.”

229A MASONIC APRON WITH SYMBOLIC FIGURES.
From an early hand-painted Masonic apron.
While the mystic symbolism of Freemasonry decrees that the apron shall be a simple square of white
lambskin with appropriate flap, Masonic aprons are frequently decorated with curious and impressive figures. “When silk cotton, or linen is worn,” writes albert Pike, “the symbolism is lost. nor is one clothed
who blots, defaces, and desecrates the white surface with ornamentation, figuring, or colors of any kind.” (See Symbolism.)
To Mars, the ancient plane of cosmic energy, the Atlantean and Chaldean “star gazers” assigned Ar -
ies as a diurnal throne and scorpio as a nocturnal throne. those not raised to spiritual life by initiation
are described as “dead from the sting of a scorpion,” for they wander in the night side of divine power. Through the mystery of the Paschal Lamb, or the attainment of the Golden Fleece, these soul are raised into the constructive day Power of mars in aries – the symbol of the Creator.
When worn over the area related to the animal passions, the pure lambskin signifies the regeneration of the procreative forces and their consecration to the service of the Deity. The size of the apron, exclusive of the flap, makes it the symbol of salvation, for the Mysteries declare that it must consist of 144 square inches.
the apron shown above contains a wealth of symbolism: the beehive, emblematic of the masonic
lodge itself, the trowel, the mallet, and the trestleboad; the rough and trued ashlars; the pyramids and hills of Lebanon; the pillars, the Temple, and checkerboard floor; and the blazing star and tools of the Craft. The center of the apron is occupied by the compass and square, representative of the Macrocosm an the microcosm, and the alternately black and white serpent of astral light. below is an acacia branch with
seven sprigs, signifying the life Centers of the superior and the inferior man. the skull and cross bones
are a continual reminder that the spiritual nature attains liberation only after the philosophical death of man’s sensuous personality.

230Chiram, as master of the builders, divided his workmen into three groups, which
were termed Entered Apprentices , Fellow-Craftsmen , and Master Masons. to each division he gave certain passwords and signs by which their respective excellence could be
quickly determined. While all were classified according to their merits some were dissat-isfied, for they desired a more exalted position than they were capable of filling. At last three Fellow-Craftsmen, more daring than their companions, determined to force CHiram to reveal to them the password of the Master’s degree. Knowing that CHiram always went into the unfinished sanctum sanctorum at high noon to pray, these ruffians – whose names
were Jubela, Jubelo, and Jubelum – lay in wait for him, one at each of the main gates of the temple. Chiram, about to leave the temple by the south gate, was suddenly confronted by Jubela armed with a twenty-four-inch gauge. Upon CHiram’s refusal to reveal the master’s Word, the ruffian struck him on the throat with the rule, and the wounded Master
then hastened to the west gate, where Jubelo, armed with a square, awaited him and made a similar demand. again Chiram was silent, and the second assassin struck him on the
breast with the square. CHiram thereupon staggered to the east gate, only to be met there by Jubelum armed with a maul. When CHiram, refused him the Master’s Word, Jubelum struck the master between the eyes with the mallet and Chiram fell dead.
the body of Chiram was buried by the murderers over the brow of mount moriah
and a sprig of acacia placed upon the grave. the murderers then sought to escape punishment for their crime by embarking for Ethiopia, but the port was closed. all three were finally captured, and after admitting their guilt were duly executed. Parties of three were then sent out by King Solomon, and one of these groups discovered the newly made grave marked by the evergreen sprig. After the Entered Apprentices and the Fellow-Craftsmen had failed to resurrect their Master from the dead he was finally raised by the master mason with the “strong grip of a lion’s Paw.”
to the initiated builder the name CHiram Abiff signifies “My Father, the Universal
spirit, one in essence, three in aspect.” thus the murdered master is a type of the Cosmic Martyr – the crucified Spirit of Good, the dying god – whose mystery is celebrated
throughout the world. among the manuscripts of Dr. sigismund bastrom, the initiated
rosicrucian, appears the following extract from von Welling concerning the true philo-sophic nature of the masonic Chiram:
“The original word ,םריחCHiram, is a radical word consisting of three consonants ר חand םi. e. Cheth, Resh and Mem. (1) ,ח Cheth, signifies Chamah, the
sun’s light, i. e. the Universal, invisible, cold fire of Nature attracted by the sun,
manifested into light and sent down to us and to every planetary body belonging to the solar system. (2) ,ר Resh, signifies חיר Ruach, i. e. Spirit, air, wind,
as being the Vehicle which conveys and collects the light into numberless Foci, wherein the solar rays of light are agitated by a circular motion and manifested in Heat and burning Fire. (3) ,םor מ Mem, signifies majim, water, humidity, but
rather the mother of water, i. e. radical humidity or a particular kind of condensed air. These three constitute the Universal Agent or fire of Nature in one word, ,םריחCHiram, not hiram.”