The Human Body
in Symbolism
ThE OLDEST , THE MOST PROFOUND , the most universal of all symbols
is the human body. the Greeks, Persians, Egyptians, and hindus considered
a philosophical analysis of man’s triune nature to be an indispensable part of
ethical and religious training. the mysteries of every nation taught that the laws, elements, and powers of the universe were epitomized in the human constitution; that everything which existed outside of man had its analogue within man. the universe, being
immeasurable in its immensity and inconceivable in its profundity, was beyond mortal estimation. Even the gods themselves could comprehend but a part of the inaccessible glory which was their source. When temporarily permeated with divine enthusiasm, man may transcend for a brief moment the limitations of his own personality and behold in part that celestial effulgence in which all creation is bathed. but even in his periods of greatest illumination man is incapable of imprinting upon the substance of his rational soul a perfect image of the multiform expression of celestial activity.
Recognizing the futility of attempting to cope intellectually with that which transcends
the comprehension of the rational faculties, the early philosophers turned their attention from the inconceivable Divinity to man himself, with in the narrow confines of whose nature they found manifested all the mysteries of the external spheres. as the natural
outgrowth of this practice there was fabricated a secret theological system in which God was considered as the Grand man and, conversely, man as the little god. Continuing this
analogy, the universe was regarded as a man and, conversely, man as a miniature universe. the greater universe was termed the Macrocosm – the Great World or body – and the
Divine life or spiritual entity controlling its functions was called the Macroprosophus.
man’s body, or the individual human universe, was termed the Microcosm, and the Divine
life or spiritual entity controlling its functions was called the Microprosophus. the pagan
mysteries were primarily concerned with instructing neophytes in the true relationship existing between the Macrocosm and the Microcosm – in other words, between God and
man. accordingly, the key to these analogies between the organs and functions of the Microcosmic man and those of the Macrocosmic Man constituted the most prized possession
of the early initiates.
in Isis Unveiled, H. P. Blavatsky summarizes the pagan concept of man as follows:
“man is a little world – a microcosm inside the great universe. like a fetus,
he is suspended, by all his three spirits, in the matrix of the macrocosmos; and
while his terrestrial body is in constant sympathy with its parent earth, his astral soul lives in unison with the sidereal anima mundi. he is in it, as it is in him, for

216the world-pervading element fills all space, and is space itself, only shoreless and
infinite. As to his third spirit, the divine, what is it but an infinitesimal ray, one of the countless radiations proceeding directly from the highest Cause – the spiritual
light of the World? this is the trinity of organic and inorganic nature – the spiritual
and the physical, which are three in one, and of which Proclus says that ‘The first monad is the Eternal God; the second, eternity; the third, the paradigm, or pattern of the universe;’ the three constituting the intelligible triad.”
long before the introduction of idolatry into religion, the early priests caused the statue of a man to be placed in the sanctuary of the temple. This human figure symbolized the Divine Power in all its intricate manifestations. Thus the priests of antiquity accepted man as their textbook, and through the study of him learned to understand the greater and more abstruse mysteries of the celestial scheme of which they were a part. it is not improbable
that this mysterious figure standing over the primitive altars was made in the nature of a manikin and, like certain emblematic hands in the mystery schools, was covered with ei-ther carved or painted hieroglyphs. the statue may have opened, thus showing the relative
positions of the organs, bones, muscles, nerves, and other parts. after ages of research,
the manikin became a mass of intricate hieroglyphs and symbolic figures. Every part had its secret meaning. the measurements formed a basic standard by means of which it was
possible to measure all parts of cosmos. it was a glorious composite emblem of all the
knowledge possessed by the sages and hierophants.
then came the age of idolatry. the mysteries decayed from within. the secrets were
lost and none knew the identity of the mysterious man who stood over the altar. it was
remembered only that the figure was a sacred and glorious symbol of the Universal Power, and it: finally came to be looked upon as a god – the One in whose image man was made. having lost the knowledge of the purpose for which the manikin was originally con-structed, the priests worshiped this effigy until at last their lack of spiritual understanding brought the temple down in ruins about their heads and the statue crumbled with the civi-lization that had forgotten its meaning.
Proceeding from this assumption of the first theologians that man is actually fashioned
in the image of God, the initiated minds of past ages erected the stupendous structure of theology upon the foundation of the human body. the religious world of today is almost
totally ignorant of the fact that the science of biology is the fountainhead of its doctrines and tenets. many of the codes and laws believed by modern divines to have been direct
revelations from Divinity are in reality the fruitage of ages of patient delving into the in-tricacies of the human constitution and the infinite wonders revealed by such a study .
in nearly all the sacred books of the world can be traced an anatomical analogy. this
is most evident in their creation myths. anyone familiar with embryology and obstetrics
will have no difficulty in recognizing the basis of the allegory concerning Adam and Eve and the Garden of Eden, the nine degrees of the Eleusinian mysteries, and the brahmanic
legend of vishnu’s incarnations. the story of the universal Egg, the scandinavian myth
of Ginnungagap (the dark cleft in space in which the seed of the world is sown), and the use of the fish as the emblem of the paternal generative power – all show the true origin of

217theological speculation. The philosophers of antiquity realized that man himself was the
key to the riddle of life, for he was the living image of the Divine Plan, and in future ages humanity also will come to realize more fully the solemn import of those ancient words: “the proper study of mankind is man.”
both God and man have a twofold constitution, of which the superior part is invisible
and the inferior visible. in both there is also an intermediary sphere, marking the point
where these visible and invisible natures meet. as the spiritual nature of God controls his
objective universal form-which is actually a crystallized idea – so the spiritual nature of man is the invisible cause and controlling power of his visible material personality. thus
it is evident that the spirit of man bears the same relationship to his material body that God bears to the objective universe. the mysteries taught that spirit, or life, was anterior to
form and that what is anterior includes all that is posterior to itself. spirit being anterior to
form, form is therefore included within the realm of spirit. it is also a popular statement or
belief that man’s spirit is within his body. according to the conclusions of philosophy and
theology, however, this belief is erroneous, for spirit first circumscribes an area and then manifests within it. Philosophically speaking, form, being a part of spirit, is within spirit; but: spirit is more than the sum of form, as the material nature of man is therefore within
the sum of spirit, so the universal nature, including the entire sidereal system, is within
the all-pervading essence of God – the universal spirit.
according to another concept of the ancient wisdom, all bodies – whether spiritual or
material – have three centers, called by the Greeks the upper center, the middle center,
and the lower center. An apparent ambiguity will here be noted. To diagram or symbolize
adequately abstract mental verities is impossible, for the diagrammatic representation of one aspect of metaphysical relationships may be an actual contradiction of some other aspect. While that which is above is generally considered superior in dignity and power, in reality that which is in the center is superior and anterior to both that which is said to be above and that which is said to be below. Therefore, it must be said that the first – which is considered as being above – is actually in the center, while both of the others (which are said to be either above or below) are actually beneath. This point can be further simplified if the reader will consider above as indicating degree of proximity to source and below
as indicating degree of distance from source, source being posited in the actual center and relative distance being the various points along the radii from the center toward the circumference. in matters pertaining to philosophy and theology, up may be considered as
toward the center and down as toward the circumference. Center is spirit; circumference is
matter. therefore, up is toward spirit along an ascending scale of spirituality; down is toward matter along an ascending scale of materiality. the latter concept is partly expressed
by the apex of a cone which, when viewed from above, is seen as a point in the exact center of the circumference formed by the base of the cone.
these three universal centers – the one above, the one below, and the link uniting
them-represent three suns or three aspects of one sun – centers of effulgence. these also
have their analogues in the three grand centers of the human body, which, like the physi-cal universe, is a Demiurgic fabrication. “The first of these [suns],” says Thomas Taylor, “is analogous to light when viewed subsisting in its fountain the sun; the second to the

218light immediately proceeding from the sun; and the third to the splendour communicated
to other natures by this light.”
THE TETRAGRAMMATONIN THE HUMAN HEART.From Böhme’s Libri Apologetici .
the tetragrammaton, or four-lettered name
of God, is here arranged as a tetractys within the inverted human heart. beneath, the name Jehovah is shown transformed into Jehoshua
by the interpolation of the radiant hebrew letter ,הס Shin. the drawing as a whole represents the throne of God and his hierarchies within the heart of man. In the first book of his Libri Apologetici , Jakob Böhme thus describes the meaning of the symbol:
“For we men have one book in common which points to God. Each has it within himself, which
is the priceless Name of God. Its letters are the flames of His love, which He out of His heart in the priceless Name of Jesus has revealed in us. Read these letters in your hearts and spirits and you have books enough. all the writings of the children of God direct you unto that one book, for
therein lie all the treasures of wisdom. (...) This book is Christ in you.”
Since the superior (or spiritual) center is in the midst of the other two, its analogue
in the physical body is the heart – the most spiritual and mysterious organ in the human body. The second center (or the link between the superior and inferior worlds) is elevated to the position of greatest physical dignity – the brain. The third (or lower) center is relegated to the position of least physical dignity but greatest physical importance – the generative system. thus the heart is symbolically the source of life; the brain the link by which, through rational intelligence, life and form are united; and the generative system – or infernal creator – the source of that power by which physical organisms are produced. the ideals and aspirations of the individual depend largely upon which of these three centers of power predominates in scope and activity of expression. in the materialist the
lower center is the strongest, in the intellectualist the higher center; but in the initiate the middle center – by bathing the two extremes in a flood of spiritual effulgence – controls wholesomely both the mind and the body.
as light bears witness of life-which is its source-so the mind bears witness of the spirit,
and activity in a still lower plane bears witness of intelligence. thus the mind bears witness
of the heart, while the generative system, in turn, bears witness of the mind. accordingly,
the spiritual nature is most commonly symbolized by a heart; the intellectual power by an opened eye, symbolizing the pineal gland or Cyclopean eye, which is the two-faced Janus of the pagan Mysteries; and the generative system by a flower, a staff, a cup, or a hand.