Introduction
PhilosoPhY is thE sCiEnCE of estimating values. the superiority of any
state or substance over another is determined by philosophy. by assigning a
position of primary importance to what remains when all that is secondary
has been removed, philosophy thus becomes the true index of priority or emphasis in the
realm of speculative thought. the mission of philosophy a priori is to establish the relation
of manifested things to their invisible ultimate cause or nature.
“Philosophy,” writes Sir William Hamilton, “has been defined [as]: The science of things
divine and human, and of the causes in which they are contained [Cicero]; The science of effects by their causes [Hobbes]; The science of sufficient reasons [Leibnitz]; The science of things possible, inasmuch as they are possible [Wolf]; The science of things evidently deduced from first principles [Descartes]; The science of truths, sensible and abstract [de Condillac]; The application of reason to its legitimate objects [Tennemann]; The sci-ence of the relations of all knowledge to the necessary ends of human reason [Kant];The science of the original form of the ego or mental self [Krug]; The science of sciences [Fichte]; The science of the absolute [von Schelling]; The science of the absolute indif-ference of the ideal and real [von Schelling] – or, The identity of identity and non-identity [Hegel].” (See Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic .)
The six headings under which the disciplines of philosophy are commonly classified
are: metaphysics, which deals with such abstract subjects as cosmology, theology, and the
nature of being; logic, which deals with the laws governing rational thinking, or, as it has
been called, “the doctrine of fallacies”; ethics, which is the science of morality, individual
responsibility, and character – concerned chiefly with an effort to determine the nature of good; psychology, which is devoted to investigation and classification of those forms of
phenomena referable to a mental origin; epistemology, which is the science concerned
primarily with the nature of knowledge itself and the question of whether it may exist in an absolute form; and æsthetics, which is the science of the nature of and the reactions
awakened by the beautiful, the harmonious, the elegant, and the noble.
Plato regarded philosophy as the greatest good ever imparted by Divinity to man. in the
twentieth century, however, it has become a ponderous and complicated structure of arbitrary and irreconcilable notions – yet each substantiated by almost incontestible logic. the lofty
theorems of the old academy which iamblichus likened to the nectar and ambrosia of the
gods have been so adulterated by opinion – which heraclitus declared to be a falling sickness
of the mind – that the heavenly mead would now be quite unrecognizable to this great Neo-Platonist. Convincing evidence of the increasing superficiality of modern scientific and philo-sophic thought is its persistent drift towards materialism. When the great astronomer laplace
was asked by napoleon why he had not mentioned God in his Traité de la Mécanique Céleste,
the mathematician naively replied: “sire, i had no need for that hypothesis!”

In his treatise on Atheism, Sir Francis Bacon tersely summarizes the situation thus: “A
little philosophy inclineth man’s mind to atheism; but depth in philosophy bringeth men’s
minds about to religion.” the metaphysics of aristotle opens with these words: “all men
naturally desire to know.” to satisfy this common urge the unfolding human intellect has
explored the extremities of imaginable space without and the extremities of imaginable self within, seeking to estimate the relationship between the one and the all; the effect and the cause; nature and the groundwork of nature; the mind and the source of the mind; the
spirit and the substance of the spirit; the illusion and the reality.
an ancient philosopher once said: “he who has not even a knowledge of common
things is a brute among men. he who has an accurate knowledge of human concerns alone
is a man among brutes. but he who knows all that can be known by intellectual energy,
is a God among men.” man’s status in the natural world is determined, therefore, by the
quality of his thinking. He whose mind is enslaved to his bestial instincts is philosophi-cally not superior to the brute-, he whose rational faculties ponder human affairs is a man; and he whose intellect is elevated to the consideration of divine realities is already a demigod, for his being partakes of the luminosity with which his reason has brought him into proximity. in his encomium of “the science of sciences” Cicero is led to exclaim: “o
philosophy, life’s guide! o searcher – out of virtue and expeller of vices! What could we
and every age of men have been without thee? thou hast produced cities; thou hast called
men scattered about into the social enjoyment of life.”
in this age the word philosophy has little meaning unless accompanied by some other
qualifying term. The body of philosophy has been broken up into numerous isms more
or less antagonistic, which have become so concerned with the effort to disprove each other’s fallacies that the sublimer issues of divine order and human destiny have suffered deplorable neglect. The ideal function of philosophy is to serve as the stabilizing influence in human thought. by virtue of its intrinsic nature it should prevent man from ever establishing unreasonable codes of life. Philosophers themselves, however, have frustrated the ends of philosophy by exceeding in their woolgathering those untrained minds whom they are supposed to lead in the straight and narrow path of rational thinking. to list and classify any but the more important of the now recognized schools of philosophy is beyond the space limitations of this volume. the vast area of speculation covered by philosophy
will be appreciated best after a brief consideration of a few of the outstanding systems of philosophic discipline which have swayed the world of thought during the last twenty-six centuries. The Greek school of philosophy had its inception with the seven immortalized thinkers upon whom was first conferred the appellation of Sophos, “the wise.” according to Diogenes laertius, these were thales, solon, Chilon, Pittacus, bias, Cleobulus,
and Periander. Water was conceived by thales to be the primal principle or element,
upon which the earth floated like a ship, and earthquakes were the result of disturbances in this universal sea. since thales was an ionian, the school perpetuating his tenets became known as the Ionic. He died in 546 B.C., and was succeeded by Anaximander, who in turn was followed by anaximenes, anaxagoras, and archelaus, with whom the ionic
school ended. anaximander, differing from his master thales, declared measureless and
indefinable infinity to be the principle from which all things were generated. Anaximenes

19asserted air to be the first element of the universe; that souls and even the Deity itself were
composed of it.
Anaxagoras (whose doctrine savors of atomism) held God to be an infinite self-moving mind; that this divine infinite Mind, not inclosed in any body, is the efficient cause of all things; out of the infinite matter consisting of similar parts, everything being made according to its species by the divine mind, who when all things were at first confusedly mingled together, came and reduced them to order.” archelaus declared the principle of
all things to be twofold: mind (which was incorporeal) and air (which was corporeal), the rarefaction and condensation of the latter resulting in fire and water respectively. The stars were conceived by Archelaus to be burning iron places. Heraclitus (who lived 536-470 b.C. and is sometimes included in the ionic school) in his doctrine of change and eternal
flux asserted fire to be the first element and also the state into which the world would ulti -
mately be reabsorbed. the soul of the world he regarded as an exhalation from its humid
parts, and he declared the ebb and flow of the sea to be caused by the sun.
after Pythagoras of samos, its founder, the Italic or Pythagorean school numbers
among its most distinguished representatives Empedocles, Epicharmus, archytas, alcmæon, Hippasus, Philolaus, and Eudoxus. Pythagoras (580-500? B.C.) conceived math -
ematics to be the most sacred and exact of all the sciences, and demanded of all who came to him for study a familiarity with arithmetic, music, astronomy, and geometry. he laid
special emphasis upon the philosophic life as a prerequisite to wisdom. Pythagoras was
one of the first teachers to establish a community wherein all the members were of mutual assistance to one another in the common attainment of the higher sciences. he also introduced the discipline of retrospection as essential to the development of the spiritual mind. Pythagoreanism may be summarized as a system of metaphysical speculation concerning the relationships between numbers and the causal agencies of existence. this school also
first expounded the theory of celestial harmonics or “the music of the spheres.” John Re-uchlin said of Pythagoras that he taught nothing to his disciples before the discipline of silence, silence being the first rudiment of contemplation. In his Sophist, aristotle credits
Empedocles with the discovery of rhetoric. both Pythagoras and Empedocles accepted
the theory of transmigration, the latter saying: “a boy i was, then did a maid become; a
plant, bird, fish, and in the vast sea swum.”
archytas is credited with invention of the screw and the crane. Pleasure he declared
to be a pestilence because it was opposed to the temperance of the mind; he considered a man without deceit to be as rare as a fish without bones.
the Eleatic sect was founded by Xenophanes (570-480 B.C.), who was conspicuous for his attacks upon the cosmologic and theogonic fables of homer and hesiod.
Xenophanes declared that God was “one and incorporeal, in substance and figure round, in no way resembling man; that he is all sight and all hearing, but breathes not;
that he is all things, the mind and wisdom, not generate but eternal, impassible, immutable, and rational.” Xenophanes believed that all existing things were eternal, that the world was without beginning or end, and that everything which was generated was subject to corruption. he lived to great age and is said to have buried his sons with
his own hands. Parmenides studied under Xenophanes, but never entirely subscribed

20to his doctrines. Parmenides declared the senses to be uncertain and reason the only
criterion of truth. He first asserted the earth to be round and also divided its surface into zones of hear and cold.
BABBITT’S ATOM.From Babbitt’sPrinciples of Light and Color .
since the postulation of the atomic
theory by Democritus, many efforts have been made to determine the structure of atoms and the method by which they unite to form vari-ous elements, Even science has not refrained from entering this field of speculation and presents for consid-eration most detailed and elaborate representations of these minute bod-ies. by far the most remarkable con-ception of the atom evolved during the last century is that produced by the genius of Dr. Edwin D. babbitt and which is reproduced herewith. the diagram is self-explanatory. it
must be borne in mind that this ap-parently massive structure is actually s minute as to defy analysis. not
only did Dr. babbitt create this form of the atom but he also contrived a method whereby these particles could be grouped together in an or -
derly manner and thus result in the formation of molecular bodies.
melissus, who is included in the Eleatic school, held many opinions in common
with Parmenides. he declared the universe to be immovable because, occupying all
space, there was no place to which it could be moved. he further rejected the theory
of a vacuum in space. Zeno of Elea also maintained that a vacuum could not exist. rejecting the theory of motion, he asserted that there was but one God, who was an
eternal, ungenerated being. like Xenophanes, he conceived Deity to be spherical in
shape. leucippus held the universe to consist of two parts: one full and the other a
vacuum. From the Infinite a host of minute fragmentary bodies descended into the vacuum, where, through continual agitation, they organized themselves into spheres of substance.
the great Democritus to a certain degree enlarged upon the atomic theory of leucippus. Democritus declared the principles of all things to be twofold: atoms and vacuum.