Isis, the Virgin
of the World
It IS ESPECIALLY FITTING that a study of hermetic symbolism should begin with a discussion of the symbols and attributes of the Saitic Isis. this is the
isis of sais, famous for the inscription concerning her which appeared on the
front of her temple in that city: “I, Isis, am all that has been, that is or shall be; no mortal
Man hath ever me unveiled .”
Plutarch affirms that many ancient authors believed this goddess to be the daughter of
hermes; others held the opinion that she was the child of Prometheus. both of these demigods were noted for their divine wisdom. it is not improbable that her kinship to them is
merely allegorical. Plutarch translates the name isis to mean wisdom. Godfrey higgins,
in his Anacalypsis, derives the name of Isis from the Hebrew ,עשי Iso, and the Greek ζωω,
to save. Some authorities, however, for example, Richard Payne Knight (as stated in his Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology), believe the word to be of northern
extraction, possibly scandinavian or Gothic. in these languages the name is pronounced
Isa, meaning ice, or water in its most passive, crystallized, negative state.
this Egyptian deity under many names appears as the principle of natural fecundity
among nearly all the religions of the ancient world. she was known as the goddess with
ten thousand appellations and was metamorphosed by Christianity into the virgin mary,
for isis, although she gave birth to all living things – chief among them the sun – still
remained a virgin, according to the legendary accounts.
apuleius in the eleventh book of The Golden Ass ascribes to the goddess the following
statement concerning her powers and attributes:
“behold, * *, i, moved by thy prayers, am present with thee; i, who am nature,
the parent of things, the queen of all the elements, the primordial progeny of ages, the supreme of Divinities, the sovereign of the spirits of the dead, the first of the celestials, and the uniform resemblance of Gods and Goddesses. i, who rule by my
nod the luminous summits of the heavens, the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the deplorable silences of the realms beneath, and whose one divinity the whole orb of the earth venerates under a manifold form, by different rites and a variety of appellations. hence the primogenial Phrygians call me Pessinuntica, the mother of
the Gods, the Attic Aborigines, Cecropian Minerva; the floating Cyprians, Paphian venus; the arrow-bearing Cretans, Diana Dictynna; the three-tongued sicilians,
stygian Proserpine; and the Eleusinians, the ancient Goddess Ceres. some also
call me Juno, others Bellona, others Hecate, and others Rhamnusia. And those who are illuminated by the incipient rays of that divinity the Sun, when he rises, viz. the

Ethiopians, the arii, and the Egyptians skilled in ancient learning, worshipping me
by ceremonies perfectly appropriate, call me by my true name, Queen isis.”
le Plongeon believes that the Egyptian myth of isis had a historical basis among the
mayas of Central america, where this goddess was known as Queen moo. in Prince Coh
the same author finds a correspondence to Osiris, the brother-husband of Isis. Le Plongeon’s theory is that Mayan civilization was far more ancient than that of Egypt. After the death of Prince Coh, his widow, Queen Moo, fleeing to escape the wrath of his murderers, sought refuge among the Mayan colonies in Egypt, where she was accepted as their queen and was given the name of isis. While le Plongeon may be right, the possible historical
queen sinks into insignificance when compared with the allegorical, symbolic World Vir -
gin; and the fact that she appears among so many different races and peoples discredits the theory that she was a historical individual.
ISIS, QUEEN OF HEA VEN.From Mosaize Historie der Hebreeuwse Kerke.
Diodorus writes of a famous inscription
carved on a column at nysa, in arabia, wherein isis described herself as follows: “i am isis, Queen of this country. i was instructed by mercury. no one can destroy the laws which i have established. i am the eldest daughter of saturn, most ancient of the gods. i am the
wife and sister of Osiris the King. I first made known to mortals the use of wheat. i am the
mother of Orus the King. In my honor was the city of bubaste built. rejoice, o Egypt, re-joice, land that gave me birth!” (See “Morals and Dogma,” by albert Pike.)
according to sextus Empyricus,
the trojan war was fought over a statue of the moon goddess. For this lu-nar helena, and not for a woman, the
Greeks and trojans struggled at the
gates of troy.
several authors have attempted to
prove that isis, osiris, typhon, nephthys, and Aroueris (Thoth, or Mercury)

121were grandchildren of the great Jewish patriarch Noah by his son Ham. But as the story of
noah and his ark is a cosmic allegory concerning the repopulation of planets at the begin-ning of each world period, this only makes it less likely that they were historical person-ages. According to Robert Fludd, the sun has three properties – life, light, and heat. these
three vivify and vitalize the three worlds – spiritual, intellectual, and material. Therefore, it is said “from one light, three lights,” i. e. the first three Master Masons. In all probabil -
ity, Osiris represents the third, or material, aspect of solar activity, which by its beneficent influences vitalizes and enlivens the flora and fauna of the earth. Osiris is not the sun, but the sun is symbolic of the vital principle of nature, which the ancients knew as osiris. his
symbol, therefore, was an opened eye, in honor of the Great Eye of the universe, the sun. Opposed to the active, radiant principle of impregnating fire, hear, and motion was the passive, receptive principle of nature.
modern science has proved that forms ranging in magnitude from solar systems to
atoms are composed of positive, radiant nuclei surrounded by negative bodies that exist upon the emanations of the central life. From this allegory we have the story of Solomon and his wives, for solomon is the sun and his wives and concubines are the planets,
moons, asteroids, and other receptive bodies within his house – the solar mansion. isis,
represented in the Song of Solomon by the dark maid of Jerusalem, is symbolic of recep-tive nature – the watery, maternal principle which creates all things out of herself after
impregnation has been achieved by the virility of the sun.
In the ancient world the year had 360 days. The five extra days were gathered together
by the God of Cosmic Intelligence to serve as the birthdays of the five gods and goddesses who are called the sons and daughters of Ham. Upon the first of these special days Osiris was born and upon the fourth of them Isis. (The number four shows the relation that this
goddess bears to the earth and its elements.) typhon, the Egyptian Demon or spirit of
the Adversary, was born upon the third day. Typhon is often symbolized by a crocodile; sometimes his body is a combination of crocodile and hog. isis stands for knowledge and
wisdom, and according to Plutarch the word Typhon means insolence and pride. Egotism,
self-centeredness, and pride are the deadly enemies of understanding and truth. this part
of the allegory is revealed.
After Osiris, here symbolized as the sun, had become King of Egypt and had given
to his people the full advantage of his intellectual light, he continued his path through the heavens, visiting the peoples of other nations and converting all with whom he came in contact. Plutarch further asserts that the Greeks recognized in Osiris the same person whom they revered under the names of Dionysos and Bacchus. While he was away from
his country, his brother, typhon, the Evil one, like the loki of scandinavia, plotted against
the sun God to destroy him. Gathering seventy-two persons as fellow conspirators, he attained his nefarious end in a most subtle manner. he had a wonderful ornamented box
made just the size of the body of Osiris. This he brought into a banquet hall where the gods and goddesses were feasting together. all admired the beautiful chest, and typhon
promised to give it to the one whose body fitted it most perfectly. One after another lay down in the box, but in disappointment rose again, until at last osiris also tried. the moment he was in the chest typhon and his accomplices nailed the cover down and sealed

122the cracks with molten lead. They then cast the box into the Nile, down which it floated
to the sea. Plutarch states that the date upon which this occurred was the seventeenth day of the month Athyr, when the sun was in the constellation of Scorpio. This is most signifi-cant, for the scorpion is the symbol of treachery. the time when osiris entered the chest
was also the same season that noah entered the ark to escape from the Deluge.
Plutarch further declares that the Pans and Satyrs (the Nature spirits and elementals)
first discovered that Osiris had been murdered. These immediately raised an alarm, and from this incident the word panic, meaning fright or amazement of the multitudes, originated. isis, upon receiving the news of her husband’s murder, which she learned from
some children who had seen the murderers making off with the box, at once robed herself in mourning and started forth in quest of him.
At length Isis discovered that the chest had floated to the coast of Byblos. There it had
lodged in the branches of a tree, which in a short time miraculously grew up around the box. This so amazed the king of that country that he ordered the tree to be cut down and a pillar made from its trunk to support the roof of his palace. isis, visiting byblos, recovered the body
of her husband, but it was again stolen by typhon, who cut it into fourteen parts, which he
scattered all over the earth. isis, in despair, began gathering up the severed remains of her
husband, but found only thirteen pieces. The fourteenth part (the phallus) she reproduced in gold, for the original had fallen into the river Nile and had been swallowed by a fish.
typhon was later slain in battle by the son of osiris. some of the Egyptians believed that the souls of the gods were taken to heaven, where they shone forth as stars. it was supposed that the soul of isis gleamed from the Dog star, while typhon
became the constellation of the bear. it is doubtful, however, whether this idea was
ever generally accepted.
among the Egyptians, isis is often represented with a headdress consisting of the
empty throne chair of her murdered husband, and this peculiar structure was accepted during certain dynasties as her hieroglyphic. the headdresses of the Egyptians have great
symbolic and emblematic importance, for they represent the auric bodies of the superhu-man intelligences, and are used in the same way that the nimbus, halo, and aureole are used in Christian religious art. Frank C. Higgins, a well-known Masonic symbolist, has astutely noted that the ornate headgears of certain gods and Pharaohs are inclined back-ward at the same angle as the earth’s axis. the robes, insignia, jewels, and ornamentations
of the ancient hierophants symbolized the spiritual energies radiating from the human body. modern science is rediscovering many of the lost secrets of hermetic philosophy.
One of these is the ability to gauge the mental development, the soul qualities, and the physical health of an individual from the streamers of semi-visible electric force which pour through the surface of the skin of every human being at all times during his life. (For details concerning a scientific process for making the auric emanations visible, see The
Human Atmosphere by Dr. Walter J. Kilner.)
Isis is sometimes symbolized by the head of a cow; occasionally the entire animal is
her symbol. The first gods of the Scandinavians were licked out of blocks of ice by the Mother Cow (Audhumla), who symbolized the principle of natural nutriment and fecun-dity because of her milk. occasionally isis is represented as a bird. she often carries in