The Faith of Islam
REPrEsEntativE OF THE ATTITUDE of Christendom toward islam, till recent years at least, is Alexander Ross’s postscript to the Anglicized version,
published in 1649, of Sieur Du Ryer’s French translation of the Koran. the author of the postscript directs the following invective against Mohammed and the Koran:
“Good reader, the great arabian impostor now at last after a thousand
years, is by the way of France arrived in England, and his Alcoran, or galli-maufry of errors, (a brat as deformed as the parent, and as full of heresies as his scald head was of scurvy) hath learned to speak English. (...) If you will take a brief view of the Alcoran, you shall find it a hodgepodge made up of these four ingredients: 1. Of Contradictions. 2. Of Blasphemy. 3. Of ridiculous Fables. 4. of lies.”
The accusation of blasphemy is emphasized against Mohammed because he affirmed
that God, being unmarried, was incapable of having a son! the fallacious argument, however, is apparent from the Prophet’s own views of the nature of God as contained in the second sura of the Koran:
“To Allah [God] belongeth the east and the west; therefore, whithersoever ye
turn yourselves to pray, there is the face of allah; for allah is omnipresent and omniscient. they say, allah hath begotten children: allah forbid! to him belongeth
whatever is in heaven, and on earth; all is possessed by him, the Creator of heaven and earth; and when he decreeth a thing, he only saith unto it, be, and it is.”
in other words, the God of islam has but to desire and the object of that desire at once
comes into being, whereas the God of alexander ross must proceed in accord with the
laws of human generation!
mohammed, Prophet of islam, “the desired of all nations,” was born in mecca, a.D.
570 (?) and died in Medina, A.D. 632, or in the eleventh ),ear after the Hegira. Washington irving thus describes the signs and wonders accompanying the birth of the Prophet:
“his mother suffered none of the pangs of travail. at the moment of his coming into the world a celestial light illumined the surrounding country, and the new born child, raising his eyes to heaven, exclaimed: ‘God is great! there is no God
bur God, and i am his prophet!’ heaven and earth, we are assured, were agitated
at his advent. the lake sawa shrank back to its secret springs, leaving its borders
dry; while the Tigris, bursting its bounds, overflowed the neighboring lands. The

628palace of Khosru the king of Persia shook t on its foundations, and several of its
towers were toppled to the earth. (...) In the same eventful night the sacred fire of Zoroaster, which, guarded by the magi, had burned without interruption for upward of a thousand years, was suddenly extinguished, and all the idols in the world fell down.” (See Mahomet and His Successors.)
While the Prophet was still but a toddling babe, the angel Gabriel with seventy wings
came to him, and cutting open the child, withdrew the heart. this Gabriel cleansed of the
black drop of original sin which is in every human heart because of the perfidy of Adam and then returned the organ to its proper place in the Prophet’s body. (See footnote in E. h. Palmer’s translation of the Qur’an.)
in his youth mohammed traveled with the meccan caravans, on one occasion acted
as armor-bearer for his uncle, and spent a considerable time among the bedouins, from
whom he learned many of the religious and philosophic traditions of ancient arabia.
While traveling with his uncle, abu taleb, mohammed contacted the nestorian Christians, having encamped on a certain night near one of their monasteries. here the young
Prophet-to-be secured much of his information concerning the origin and doctrines of the Christian faith.
With the passing years mohammed attained marked success in business and when
about twenty-six years old married one of his employers, a wealthy widow nearly fifteen years his senior. The widow, Khadijah by name, was apparently somewhat mercenary, for, finding her young business manager most efficient, she resolved to retain him in that capacity for life! Khadijah was a woman of exceptional mentality and to her integrity and devotion must be ascribed the early success of the islamic cause. by his marriage
mohammed was elevated from a position of comparative poverty to one of great wealth and power, and so exemplary was his conduct that he became known throughout mecca
as “the faithful and true.”
mohammed would have lived and died an honored and respected meccan had he not
unhesitatingly sacrificed both his wealth and social position in the service of the God whose voice he heard while meditating in the cavern on mount hira in the month of
ramadan. Year after year mohammed climbed the rocky and desolate slopes of mount
Hira (since called Jebel Nur, “the Mountain of light”) and here in his loneliness cried out to God to reveal anew the pure religion of adam, that spiritual doctrine lost to mankind
through the dissensions of religious factions. Khadijah, solicitous over her husband’s as-cetic practices which were impairing his physical health, sometimes accompanied him in his weary vigil, and with womanly intuition sensed the travail of his soul. at last one
night in his fortieth year as he lay upon the floor of the cavern, enveloped in his cloak, a great light burst upon him. overcome with a sense of perfect peace and understanding in
the blessedness of the celestial presence, he lost consciousness. When he came to him-self again the angel Gabriel stood before him, exhibiting a silken shawl with mysterious
characters traced upon it. From these characters Mohammed gained the basic doctrines later embodied in the Koran. Then Gabriel spoke in a clear and wonderful voice, declaring mohammed to be the Prophet of the living God.

In awe and trembling, Mohammed hastened to Khadijah, fearing the vision to have
been inspired by the same evil spirits who served the pagan magicians so greatly despised
by him, Khadijah assured him that his own virtuous life would be his protection and that he need fear no evil. thus reassured, the Prophet awaited further visitations from Gabriel.
When these did not come, however, such a despair filled his soul that he attempted self-destruction, only to be stopped in the very act of casting himself over a cliff by the sudden reappearance of Gabriel, who again assured the Prophet that the revelations needed by his people would be given to him as necessity arose.
MOHAMMED’S
NIGHT JOURNEY TO HEA VEN.
From D’Ohsson’s
Tableau Général de l’Empire Othoman.
In the seventeenth sura of the Koran it is writ -
ten that upon a certain night mohammed was
transported from the temple at mecca to that
of Jerusalem, but no details are given of the
strange journey. in the Mishkāteu ’l-Masabih,
mohammed is made to describe his ascent
through the seven heavens into the icy presence of the may-veiled God and his subsequent return to his own bed, all in a single
night. mohammed was awakened in the night
by the angel Gabriel, who, after removing the Prophet’s heart, washed the cavity with Zamzam water, and
filled the heart itself with faith and science. A strange creature, called Alborak, or the lightning bolt , was
brought for the conveyance of the Prophet. Alborak is described as white animal of the shape and size
of a mule, with the head of a woman and the tail of a peacock. according to some versions, mohammed
merely rode Alborak to Jerusalem, where, dismounting upon Mount Moriah, he caught hold of the lower
rung of a golden ladder lowered from heaven and, accompanied by Gabriel, ascended through the seven
spheres separating he earth from the inner surface of the empyrean. at the gate of each sphere stood me of
the Patriarchs, whom Mohammed saluted as he entered the various planes. At the gate of the first heaven
stood Adam; at the gate of the second, John and Jesus (sisters’ sons); at the third, Joseph; at the fourth,
Enoch; at the fifth, Aaron; at the sixth, Moses; and at the seventh, Abraham. Another order of the Patri -
archs and prophets is given which places Jesus at the gate of the seventh heaven, and upon reaching this
Point Mohammed is said to have requested Jesus to intercede for him before the throne of God.

Possibly as a result of his lonely periods of meditation, mohammed seemingly
was subject to ecstatic swoons. on the occasions when the various suras of the Koran
were dictated he is said to have fallen unconscious, and, regardless of the chill of the
surrounding air, to have been covered with beads of perspiration. often these attacks
came without warning; at other times he would sit wrapped in a blanket to prevent a chill from the copious perspiration, and while apparently unconscious would dictate the various passages which a small circle of trusted friends would either commit to memory or reduce to writing. on one occasion in later life when abu bekr referred
to the gray hairs in his beard, mohammed, lifting the end of his beard and looking at
it, declared its whiteness to be due to the physical agony attendant upon his periods of inspiration.
if the writings attributed to mohammed be considered as merely the hallucinations of
an epileptic – and for that reason discounted – his Christian detractors should beware lest with the doctrines of the Prophet they also undermine the very teachings which they them-selves affirm, for many of the disciples, apostles, and saints of the early church are known to have been subject to nervous disorders. Mohammed’s first convert was his own wife, Khadijah, who was followed by other members of his immediate family, a circumstance which moved sir William muir to note:
“it is strongly corroborative of mohammed’s sincerity that the earliest converts to islam were not only of upright character, but his own bosom friends and
people of his household; who, intimately acquainted with his private life, could not fail otherwise to have detected those discrepancies which ever more or less ex-ist between the professions of the hypocritical deceiver abroad and his actions at: home.” (See The Life of Mohammad.)
Among the first to accept the faith of Islam was Abu Bekr, who became Mohammed’s
closest and most faithful friend, in fact his alter ego. abu bekr, a man of brilliant attainments, contributed materially to the success of the Prophet’s enterprise, and in accord with the express wish of the Prophet became the leader of the faithful after mohammed’s
death. a’isha, the daughter of abu bekr, later became the wife of mohammed, thus still
further cementing the bond of fraternity between the two men. Quietly, but industriously, mohammed promulgated his doctrines among a small circle of powerful friends. When the enthusiasm of his followers finally forced his hand and he publicly announced his mission, he was already the leader of a strong and well-organized faction. Fearing Mo-hammed’s growing prestige, the people of mecca, waiving the time-honored tradition that
blood could not be spilt within the holy city, decided to exterminate islam by assassinating the Prophet. all the different groups combined in this undertaking so that the guilt
for the crime might thereby be more evenly distributed. Discovering the danger in time, Mohammed left his friend Ali in his bed and fled with Abu Bekr from the city, and after adroitly eluding the meccans, joined the main body of his followers that had preceded him
to Yathrib (afterwards called Medina). Upon this incident-called the Hegira or “flight” – is
based the islamic chronological system.