Qabbalistic Keys to the
Creation of Man
HEnriE stEPhEn, in A World of Wonders, published in 1607, mentions a
monk of St. Anthony who declared that while in Jerusalem the patriarch of
that city had shown him not only one of the ribs of the Word made flesh and
some rays from the Star of Bethlehem, but also the snout of a seraph, a finger nail of a cherub, the horns of moses, and a casket containing the breath of Christ! to a people
believing implicitly in a seraph sufficiently tangible to have its proboscis preserved, the more profound issues of Judaistic philosophy must necessarily be incomprehensible. Nor is it difficult to imagine the reaction taking place in the mind of some ancient sage should he hear that a cherub – which, according to St. Augustine, signifies the Evange-lists; according to Philo Judæus, the outermost circumference of the entire heavens, and according to several of the Church Fathers, the wisdom of God – had sprouted finger nails. The hopeless confusion of divine principles with the allegorical figures created to represent them to the limited faculties of the uninitiated has resulted in the most atro-cious misconceptions of spiritual truths. Concepts well-nigh as preposterous as these, however, still stand as adamantine barriers to a true understanding of old and new
testament symbolism; for, until man disentangles his reasoning powers from the web of
venerated absurdities in which his mind has lain ensnared for centuries, how can truth
ever be discovered?
the old testament – especially the Pentateuch – contains not only the traditional
account of the creation of the world and of man, but also, locked within it, the secrets of the Egyptian initiators of the Moses concerning the genesis of the god-man (the
initiate) and the mystery of his rebirth through philosophy. While the lawgiver of
israel is known to have compiled several works other than those generally attributed
to him, the writings now commonly circulated as the purported sixth and seventh books of moses are in reality spurious treatises on black magic foisted on the credulous during the middle ages. out of the hundreds of millions of pious and thoughtful
students of holy Writ, it is almost inconceivable that but a mere handful have sensed
the sublimity of the esoteric teachings of Sod (the Jewish Mysteries of Adonai). Yet familiarity with the three Qabbalistical processes termed Gematria, Notarikon, and
Temurah makes possible the discovery of many of the profoundest truths of ancient Jewish superphysics.
By Gematria is meant not only the exchange of letters for their numerical equivalents
but also the method of determining by an analysis of its measurements the mystic purpose for which a building or other object was constructed. s. l. macGregor-mathers, in The
Kabbalah Unveiled , gives this example of the application of Gematria:

383“thus also the passage, Gen. xviii. 2 VHNH S HLSHH, Vehenna Shalisha, ‘ and lo,
three men,’ equals in numerical value ‘ ALV MIKAL GBRIAL VRPAL , Elo Mikhael Gabriel Ve-Raphael,’ These are Mikhael, Gabriel and Raphael; ‘for each phrase = 701.”
Assuming the sides of a scalene to be 11, 9, and 6 inches, a triangle of such dimensions
would then be an appropriate symbol of Jehovah, for the sum of its three sides would be
26, the numerical value of the Hebrew word IHVH. Gematria also includes the system of discovering the arcane meaning of a word by analyzing the size and arrangement of the strokes employed in the formation of its various letters. Gematria was employed by the Greeks as well as the Jews. The books of the New Testament – particularly those at-tributed to St. John – contain many examples of its use. Nicephorus Callistus declared the Gospel according to St. John to have been discovered in a cavern under the Temple at Jerusalem, the volume having been secreted “long anterior to the Christian æra.” The ex-istence of interpolated material in the fourth Gospel substantiates the belief that the work was originally written without any specific reference to the man Jesus, the statements therein accredited to him being originally mystical discourses delivered by the personification of the Universal Mind. The remaining Johannine writings – the Epistles and the apocalypse – are enshrouded by a similar veil of mystery.
by notarikon each letter of a word may become the initial character of a new word.
Thus from BRASHITH, first word in the book of Genesis, are extracted six words which mean that “in the beginning the Elohim saw that israel would accept the law.”
mr. macGregor- mathers also gives six additional examples of notarikon formed from
the above word by Solomon Meir Ben Moses, a mediæval Qabbalist. From the famous acrostic ascribed to the Erythræan Sibyl, St. Augustine derived the word ΙΧΘΥΣ, which by Notarikon was expanded into the phrase, “Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior.” By another use of Notarikon, directly the reverse of the first, the initial, last, or middle let-ters of the words of a sentence may be joined together to form a new word or words. For example, the name Amen, óμ@ν, maybe extracted from “ ,זטאנרלמינראthe Lord is the
faithful King.” Because they had embodied these cryptic devices in their sacred writ-ings, the ancient priests admonished their disciples never to translate, edit, or rewrite the contents of the sacred books. .
under the general heading of Temurah several systems may be grouped and explained
in which various letters are substituted for other letters according to prearranged tables or certain mathematical arrangements of letters, regular or irregular. thus the alphabet
may be broken into two equal parts and written in horizontal lines so that the letters of the lower row can be exchanged for those of the upper row, or vice versa. by this procedure
the letters of the word Kuzu may be exchanged for those of ihvh, the Tetragrammaton.
In another form of Temurah the letters are merely rearranged., היתשis the stone which is found in the center of the world, from which point the earth spread out on all sides. When broken in two the stone is ,הי תשwhich means “the placing of God.”(See Pekudei Rakov ,
71, 72.) Again, Temurah may consist of a simple anagram, as in the English word live,
which reversed becomes evil. the various systems of temurah are among the most complicated and profound devices of the ancient rabbins.

384among theological scholars there is a growing conviction that the hitherto accepted
translations of the Scriptural writings do not adequately express the spirit of the original
documents.
THE VISION OF EZEKIEL.From The “Bear” Bible.
this plate, which is from the
first Protestant Bible published in spanish, shows the Mercavah, or chariot of Jehovah, which ap -
peared to Ezekiel by the river Chebar. the prophet beheld four
strange creatures (E), each having four heads, four wings, and bra-zen hoofs like those of a calf. And there were four wheels (F) filled with eyes. Where the cherubim went the wheels went also. the
space between the cherubim and the wheels was filled with coals of fire. Upon the top of the chariot was a throne, upon which sat the likeness of a man (H). Ezekiel fell upon his knees when he beheld the mercavah surrounded by a whirlwind of clouds and flames (A, B, C). A hand (K) reached out from the clouds and the prophet was ordered to eat of a scroll which the hand held forth.according to the mystics, the
wheels supporting the throne of God represent the orbits of the planets, and the entire solar system is properly the mercavah, or chariot of God. one of the divisions of the Qabbalah – that dealing with the arts and sciences of those planes which are under the heavens – is called the mercavah. in the Zohar it is written that the celestial throne or Ezekiel’s vision signifies the traditional law; the appearance of a man sitting upon the throne represents the written law, Philo Judæus in describing the cherubim upon the Ark of the Covenant declares that the figures are an intimation of the revolutions of the whole heavens, one of the cherubim representing the outer circumference and the other the inner sphere. Facing each other , they
represent the two hemispheres of the world. The flaming sword of the cherubim of Genesis is the central motion and agitation of the heavenly bodies. in all probability it also represents the solar ray.
“After the first copy of the Book of God,” writes h. P. blavatsky, “has been
edited and launched on the world by Hilkiah, this copy disappears, and Ezra has to make a new Bible, which Judas Maccabeus finishes; (...) when it was copied from the horned letters into square letters, it was corrupted beyond recognition; (...) the Masorah completed the work of destruction; finally, we have a text, not 900 years old, abounding with omissions, interpolations, and premeditated perver-sions.” (See Isis Unveiled .)

Prof. Crawford howell toy of harvard notes:
“manuscripts were copied and recopied by scribes who not only sometimes
made errors in letters and words, but permitted themselves to introduce new material into the text, or to combine in one manuscript, without mark of division, writ-ings composed by different men; instances of these sorts of procedure are found especially in Micah and Jeremiah, and the groups of prophecies which go under the names of Isaiah and Zachariah.” (See Judaism and Christianity .)
Does the mutilated condition of the holy bible – in part accidental – represent none
the less a definite effort to confuse the uninitiated reader and thus better conceal the se-crets of the Jewish Tannaim? never has the Christian world been in possession of those
hidden scrolls which contain the secret doctrine of israel, and if the Qabbalists were correct in their assumption that the lost books of the mosaic mysteries have been woven into
the fabric of the torah, then the scriptures are veritably books within books. in rabbinical
circles the opinion is prevalent that Christendom never has understood the old testament
and probably never will. In fact, the feeling exists – in some quarters, at least – that the Old Testament is the exclusive possession of the Jewish faith; also that Christianity, after its unrelenting persecution of the Jew, takes unwarranted liberties when it includes strictly Jewish writings in its sacred canon. But, as noted by one rabbi, if Christianity must use the
Jewish Scriptures, it should at least strive to do so with some degree of intelligence!
in the opening chapter of Genesis it is stated that after creating light and separating
it from darkness, the seven Elohim divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament. Having thus established the inferior universe in perfect accord with the esoteric teachings of the hindu, Egyptian, and Greek
Mysteries, the Elohim next turned their attention to the production of flora and fauna and lastly man.
“and God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness. (...) So God
created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. and God blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful,
and multiply, and re plenish the earth, (...).”
Consider in thoughtful silence the startling use of pronouns in the above extract from
“the most perfect example of English literature.” When the plural and androgynous hebrew word Elohim was translated into the singular and sexless word God, the opening
chapters of Genesis were rendered comparatively meaningless. it may have been feared
that had the word been correctly translated as “the male and female creative agencies,” the Christians would have been justly accused of worshiping a plurality of gods in the face of their repeated claims to monotheism! the plural form of the pronouns us and our reveals
unmistakably, however, the pantheistic nature of Divinity. Further, the androgynous con-stitution of the Elohim (God) is disclosed in the next verse, where he (referring to God)
is said to have created man in his own image, male and female; or, more properly, as the