The Pythagorean Theory
of Music and Color
HarmonY is a statE rECoGniZED by great philosophers as the immediate prerequisite of beauty. A compound is termed beautiful only when its parts
are in harmonious combination. the world is called beautiful and its Creator is
designated the Good because good perforce must act in conformity with its own nature;
and good acting according to its own nature is harmony, because the good which it accom-plishes is harmonious with the good which it is. beauty, therefore, is harmony manifesting
its own intrinsic nature in the world of form.
the universe is made up of successive gradations of good, these gradations ascending from matter (which is the least degree of good) to spirit (which is the greatest degree of good). in man, his superior nature is the summum bonum. it therefore follows that his
highest nature most readily cognizes good because the good external to him in the world is in harmonic ratio with the good present in his soul. What man terms evil is therefore,
in common with matter, merely the least degree of its own opposite. the least degree of
good presupposes likewise the least degree of harmony and beauty. Thus deformity (evil) is really the least harmonious combination of elements naturally harmonic as individual units. Deformity is unnatural, for, the sum of all things being the Good, it is natural that all
things should partake of the Good and be arranged in combinations that are harmonious.
harmony is the manifesting expression of the Will of the eternal Good.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF MUSIC
it is highly probable that the Greek initiates gained their knowledge of the philosophic
and therapeutic aspects of music from the Egyptians, who, in turn, considered hermes the
founder of the art. According to one legend, this god constructed the first lyre by stretch -
ing strings across the concavity of a turtle shell. both isis and osiris were patrons of music
and poetry. Plato, in describing the antiquity of these arts among the Egyptians, declared that songs and poetry had existed in Egypt for at least ten thousand years, and that these were of such an exalted and inspiring nature that only gods or godlike men could have composed them. in the mysteries the lyre was regarded as the secret symbol of the human constitution, the body of the instrument representing the physical form, the strings the nerves, and the musician the spirit. Playing upon the nerves, the spirit thus created the harmonies of normal functioning, which, however, became discords if the nature of man were defiled.
While the early Chinese, hindus, Persians, Egyptians, israelites, and Greeks employed
both vocal and instrumental music in their religious ceremonials, also to complement

241their poetry and drama, it remained for Pythagoras to raise the art to its true dignity by
demonstrating its mathematical foundation. although it is said that he himself was not a
musician, Pythagoras is now generally credited with the discovery of the diatonic scale. Having first learned the divine theory of music from the priests of the various Mysteries into which he had been accepted, Pythagoras pondered for several years upon the laws governing consonance and dissonance. how he actually solved the problem is unknown,
but the following explanation has been invented.
one day while meditating upon the problem of harmony, Pythagoras chanced to pass
a brazier’s shop where workmen were pounding out a piece of metal upon an anvil. By noting the variances in pitch between the sounds made by large hammers and those made by smaller implements, and carefully estimating the harmonies and discords resulting from combinations of these sounds, he gained his first clue to the musical intervals of the diatonic scale. he entered the shop, and after carefully examining the tools and making
mental note of their weights, returned to his own house and constructed an arm of wood so that it: extended out from the wall of his room. at regular intervals along this arm he
attached four cords, all of like composition, size, and weight. To the first of these he at-tached a twelve-pound weight, to the second a nine-pound weight, to the third an eight-pound weight, and to the fourth a six-pound weight. these different weights corresponded
to the sizes of the braziers’ hammers.
Pythagoras thereupon discovered that the first and fourth strings when sounded together produced the harmonic interval of the octave, for doubling the weight had the same effect as halving the string. The tension of the first string being twice that of the fourth string, their ratio was said to be 2:1, or duple. By similar experimentation he ascertained that the first and third string produced the harmony of the diapente, or the interval of the fifth. The tension of the first string being half again as much as that of the third string, their ratio was said to be 3:2, or sesquialter. Likewise the second and fourth strings, having the same ratio as the first and third strings, yielded a diapente harmony. Continuing his inves-tigation, Pythagoras discovered that the first and second strings produced the harmony of the diatessaron, or the interval of the third; and the tension of the first string being a third greater than that of the second string, their ratio was said to be 4:3, or sesquitercian. The third and fourth strings, having the same ratio as the first and second strings, produced another harmony of the diatessaron. according to iamblichus, the second and third strings
had the ratio of 8:9, or epogdoan.
the key to harmonic ratios is hidden in the famous Pythagorean tetractys, or pyramid
of dots. the tetractys is made up of the first four numbers – 1, 2, 3, and 4 – which in their
proportions reveal the intervals of the octave, the diapente, and the diatessaron. While the law of harmonic intervals as set forth above is true, it has been subsequently proved that hammers striking metal in the manner described will not produce the various tones ascribed to them. in all probability, therefore, Pythagoras actually worked out his theory
of harmony from the monochord – a contrivance consisting of a single string stretched between two pegs and supplied with movable frets.
to Pythagoras music was one of the dependencies of the divine science of mathematics, and its harmonies were inflexibly controlled by mathematical proportions. The Py-

242thagoreans averred that mathematics demonstrated the exact method by which the good
established and maintained its universe. number therefore preceded harmony, since it
was the immutable law that governs all harmonic proportions. after discovering these
harmonic ratios, Pythagoras gradually initiated his disciples into this, the supreme arca-num of his mysteries. he divided the multitudinous parts of creation into a vast number
of planes or spheres, to each of which he assigned a tone, a harmonic interval, a number, a name, a color, and a form. he then proceeded to prove the accuracy of his deductions
by demonstrating them upon the different planes of intelligence and substance ranging from the most abstract logical premise to the most concrete geometrical solid. From the common agreement of these diversified methods of proof he established the indisputable existence of certain natural laws.
THE INTERV ALS AND HARMONIES OF THE SPHERES.
From Stanley’s The History of Philosophy.
in the Pythagorean concept of the music of the spheres, the interval between the earth and the sphere of
the fixed stars was considered to be a diapason – the most perfect harmonic interval. The allowing arrange-ment is most generally accepted for the musical intervals of the planets between the earth and the sphere of the fixed stars: From the sphere of the earth to the sphere of the moon; one tone; from the sphere of the moon to that of mercury, one half-tone; from mercury to venus, one-half; from venus to the sun, one and
one-half tones; from the sun to Mars, one tone; from Mars to Jupiter, one-half tone; from Jupiter to Saturn, one-half tone; from Saturn to the fixed stars, one-half tone. The sum of these intervals equals the six whole tones of the octave.
having once established music as an exact science, Pythagoras applied his newly
found law of harmonic intervals to all the phenomena of nature, even going so far as to
demonstrate the harmonic relationship of the planets, constellations, and elements to each other. a notable example of modern corroboration of ancient philosophical reaching is
that of the progression of the elements according to harmonic ratios. While making a list of the elements in the ascending order of their atomic weights, John A. Newlands discov-ered at every eighth element a distinct repetition of properties. this discovery is known as
the law of octaves in modern chemistry.

THE CONSONANCES
OF THE MUNDANE
MONOCHORD.
From Fludd’s
De Musica Mundana.
this diagrammatic sector
represents the major gradations of energy and substance between elemental
earth and absolute unconditioned force. beginning
with the superior, the
fifteen graduated spheres
descend in the following
order: limitless and Eter -
nal life; the superior, the
middle, and the inferior
Empyrean; the seven planets; and the four elements.
Energy is symbolized by
Fludd as a pyramid with
its base upon the concave
surface of the superior
Empyrean, and substance
as another Pyramid with
its base upon the convex
surface of the sphere (not
planet) of earth. these
pyramids demonstrate
the relative proportions
of energy and substance
entering into the composition of the fifteen planes of being. It will be noted that the ascending pyramid of substance touches
but does not pierce the fifteenth sphere – that of Limitless and Eternal Life. Likewise, the descending
pyramid of energy touches but does not pierce the first sphere – the grossest condition of substance.
the plane of the sun is denominated the sphere of equality, for here neither energy nor substance predominate. the mundane monochord consists of a hypothetical string stretched from the base of the
pyramid of energy to the base of the pyramid of substance.
since they held that harmony must be determined not by the sense perceptions but by
reason and mathematics, the Pythagoreans called themselves Canonics, as distinguished
from musicians of the Harmonic School, who asserted taste and instinct to be the true normative principles of harmony. Recognizing, however, the profound effect: of music upon
the senses and emotions, Pythagoras did not hesitate to influence the mind and body with what he termed “musical medicine.”
Pythagoras evinced such a marked preference for stringed instruments that he even
went so far as to warn his disciples against allowing their ears to be defiled by the sounds of flutes or cymbals. He further declared that the soul could be purified from its irrational