Mystic Christianity
ThE TRUE STORY OF THE LIFE OF JESUS of Nazareth has never been unfolded to the world, either in the accepted Gospels or in the apocrypha, although a few stray hints may be found in some of the commentaries written
by the ante-Nicene Fathers. The facts concerning His identity and mission are among the
priceless mysteries preserved to this day in the secret vaults beneath the “houses of the Brethren.” To a few of the Knights Templars, who were initiated into the arcana of the Druses, Nazarenes, Essenes, Johannites, and other sects still inhabiting the remote and in-accessible fastnesses of the holy land, part of the strange story was told. the knowledge
of the templars concerning the early history of Christianity was undoubtedly one of the
main reasons for their persecution and final annihilation. The discrepancies in the writings of the early Church Fathers not only are irreconcilable, but demonstrate beyond question that even during the first five centuries after Christ these learned men had for the basis of their writings little more substantial than folklore and hearsay. to the easy believer
everything is possible and there are no problems. the unemotional person in search of
facts, however, is confronted by a host of problems with uncertain factors, of which the following are typical:
According to popular conception, Jesus was crucified during the thirty-third year of
His life and in the third year of His ministry following His baptism. About A.D. 180, St. Irenæus, Bishop of Lyons, one of the most eminent of the ante-Nicene theologians, wrote Against Heresies, an attack on the doctrines of the Gnostics. In this work Irenæus declared upon the authority of the Apostles themselves that Jesus lived to old age. To quote:
“they, however, that they may establish their false opinion regarding that which
is written, ‘to proclaim the acceptable year of the lord,’ maintain that he preached
for one year only, and then suffered in the twelfth month. [In speaking thus], they are forgetful of their own disadvantage, destroying his whole work, and robbing
him of that age which is both more necessary and more honourable than any other; that more advanced age, i mean, during which also as a teacher he excelled all others. For how could He have had His disciples, if He did not teach? And how could He have taught, unless He had reached the age of a Master? For when He came to be baptised, he had not yet completed his thirtieth year, but was beginning
to be about thirty years of age (for thus Luke, who has mentioned His years, has expressed it: ‘Now Jesus was, as it were, beginning to be thirty years old,’ when He came to receive baptism); and, (according to these men,) He preached only one year reckoning from his baptism. on completing his thirtieth year he suffered,
being in fact still a young man, and who had by no means attained to advanced age. Now, that the first stage of early life embraces thirty years, and that this extends

590onward to the fortieth year, every one will admit; but from the fortieth and fiftieth
year a man begins to decline towards old age, which Our Lord possessed while He
still fulfilled the office of a Teacher, even as the Gospel and all the elders testify; those who were conversant in Asia with John, the disciple of the Lord, (affirming) that John conveyed to them that information. And he remained among them up to the time of Trajan. Some of them, moreover, saw not only John, but the other apostles also, and heard the very same account from them, and bear testimony as to the’(validity of) the statement. Whom then should we rather believe? Whether such men as these, or Ptolemæus, who never saw the apostles, and who never even in his dreams attained to the slightest trace of an apostle?”
Commenting on the foregoing passage, Godfrey higgins remarks that it has fortunately escaped the hands of those destroyers who have attempted to render the Gospel narratives consistent by deleting all such statements. he also notes that the doctrine of the
crucifixion was a vexata questio among Christians even during the second century.
“The evidence of Irenæus,” he says, “cannot be touched. On every principle of
sound criticism, and of the doctrine of probabilities, it is unimpeachable.”
It should further be noted that Irenæus prepared this statement to contradict another appar -
ently current in his time to the effect that the ministry of Jesus lasted but one year. of all the
early Fathers, Irenæus, writing within eighty years after the death of St. John the Evangelist, should have had reasonably accurate information. If the disciples themselves related that Jesus lived to advanced age in the body, why has the mysterious number 33 been arbitrarily chosen to symbolize the duration of His life? Were the incidents in the life of Jesus purposely altered so that His actions would fit more closely into the pattern established by the numerous Savior-Gods who preceded Him? That these analogies were recognized and used as a leverage in converting the Greeks and Romans is evident from a perusal of the writings of Justin Martyr, another second-century authority. in his Apology, Justin addresses the pagans thus:
“And when we say also that the Word, who is the first-birth of God, was produced without sexual union, and that He, Jesus Christ, Our Teacher, was crucified and died, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, we propound nothing different from what you believe regarding those whom you esteem sons of Jupiter. (...) And if we assert that the Word of God was born of God in a peculiar manner, different from ordinary generation, let this, as said above, be no extraordinary thing to you, who say that mercury is the angelic word of God. but if any one objects that he
was crucified, in this also He is on a par with those reputed sons of Jupiter of yours, who suffered as we have now enumerated.”
From this it is evident that the first missionaries of the Christian Church were far more
willing to admit the similarities between their faith and the faiths of the pagans than were their successors in later centuries.

591in an effort to solve some of the problems arising from any attempt to chronicle accurately the life of Jesus, it has been suggested that there may have lived in Syria at that
time two or more religious teachers bearing the name Jesus, Jehoshua or Joshua, and that
the lives of these men may have been confused in the Gospel stories. in his Secret Sects
of Syria and the Lebanon, Bernard H. Springett, a Masonic author, quotes from an early book, the name of which he was not at liberty to disclose because of its connection with the ritual of a sect. The last part of his quotation is germane to the subject at hand:
“But Jehovah prospered the seed of the Essenians, in holiness and love, for
many generations. then came the chief of the angels, according to the commandment of GOD, to raise up an heir to the V oice of Jehovah. And, in four generations more, an heir was born, and named Joshua, and he was the child of Joseph and Mara, devout worshippers of Jehovah, who stood aloof from all other people save the Essenians. And this Joshua, in Nazareth, reestablished Jehovah, and restored many of the lost rites and ceremonies. in the thirty-sixth year of his age he was
stoned to death in Jerusalem (...)”
Within the last century several books have been published to supplement the meager
descriptions in the Gospels of Jesus and His ministry. In some instances these narratives claim to be founded upon early manuscripts recently discovered; in others, upon direct spiritual revelation. some of these writings are highly plausible, while others are incredible. There are persistent rumors that Jesus visited and studied in both Greece and India, and that a coin struck in His honor in India during the first century has been discovered. Early Christian records are known to exist in tibet, and the monks of a buddhist monastery in Ceylon still preserve a record which indicates that Jesus sojourned with them and became conversant with their philosophy.
Although early Christianity shows every evidence of Oriental influence, this is a subject the modern church declines to discuss. If it is ever established beyond question that Jesus was an initiate of the pagan Greek or Asiatic Mysteries, the effect upon the more conservative members of the Christian faith is likely to be cataclysmic. If Jesus was God incarnate, as the solemn councils of the church discovered, why is he referred to in the
New Testament as “called of God an high prim after the order of Melchizedek”? The words “after the order” make Jesus one of a line or order of which there must have been others of equal or even superior dignity. If the “Melchizedeks” were the divine or priestly rulers of the nations of the earth before the inauguration of the system of temporal rulers, then the statements attributed to St. Paul would indicate that Jesus either was one of these “philosophic elect” or was attempting to reestablish their system of government. it will be
remembered that Melchizedek also performed the same ceremony of the drinking of wine and the breaking of bread as did Jesus at the Last Supper.
George Faber declares the original name of Jesus was Jescua Hammassiah. Godfrey
higgins has discovered two references, one in the Midrashjoholeth and the other in the
Abodazara (early Jewish commentaries on the Scriptures), to the effect that the surname of Joseph’s family was Panther, for in both of these works it is stated that a man was

592healed “in the name of Jesus ben Panther.” The name Panther establishes a direct connection between Jesus and Bacchus – who was nursed by panthers and is sometimes depicted
riding either on one of these animals or in a chariot drawn by them. the skin of the panther
was also sacred in certain of the Egyptian initiatory ceremonials. the monogram ihs,
now interpreted to mean Iesus Hominum Salvator (Jesus Savior of Men), is another direct
link between the Christian and the Bacchic rites. IHS is derived from the Greek ΥΗΣ, which, as its numerical value (608) signifies, is emblematic of the sun and constituted the sacred and concealed name of Bacchus. (See The Celtic Druids by Godfrey higgins.)
The question arises, Was early Roman Christianity confused with the worship of Bacchus because of the numerous parallelisms in the two faiths? If the affirmative can be proved, many hitherto incomprehensible enigmas of the new testament will be solved.
It is by no means improbable that Jesus Himself originally propounded as allegories
the cosmic activities which were later con fused with His own life. That the Χριστός, Christos, represents the solar power reverenced by every nation of antiquity cannot be controverted. If Jesus revealed the nature and purpose of this solar power under the name and personality of Christos, thereby giving to this abstract power the attributes of a godman, he but followed a precedent set by all previous World-t eachers. this god-man, thus
endowed with all the qualities of Deity, signifies the latent divinity in every man. Mortal man achieves deification only through at-one-ment with this divine Self. Union with the immortal Self constitutes immortality, and he who finds his true Self is therefore “saved.” this Christos, or divine man in man, is man’s real hope of salvation – the living mediator
between abstract Deity and mortal humankind. as atys, adonis, bacchus, and orpheus in
all likelihood were originally illumined men who later were confused with the symbolic personages whom they created as personifications of this divine power, so Jesus has been confused with the Christos, or god-man, whose wonders he preached. since the Christos
was the god-man imprisoned in every creature, it was the first duty of the initiate to lib-erate, or “resurrect, “ this Eternal one within himself. he who attained reunion with his
Christos was consequently termed a Christian, or Christened, man.
one of the most profound doctrines of the pagan philosophers concerned the universal
savior-God who lifted the souls of regenerated men to heaven through his own nature. this
concept was unquestionably the inspiration for the words attributed to Jesus: “I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by me.” In an effort to make a sin-gle person out of Jesus and His Christos, Christian writers have patched together a doctrine which must be resolved back into its original constituents if the true meaning of Christianity is to be rediscovered. in the Gospel narratives the Christos represents the perfect man who,
having passed through the various stages of the “World Mystery” symbolized by the thirty-three years, ascends to the heaven sphere where he is reunited with his Eternal Father. The story of Jesus as now preserved is – like the Masonic story of Hiram Abiff – part of a secret initiatory ritualism belonging to the early Christian and pagan mysteries.
During the centuries just prior to the Christian Era, the secrets of the pagan mysteries had
gradually fallen into the hands of the profane. to the student of comparative religion it is evident that these secrets, gathered by a small group of faithful philosophers and mystics, were reclothed in new symbolical garments and thus preserved for several centuries under the name