The Ancient Mysteries and
Secret Societies
Part Two
ThE ENTIRE HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN and pagan Gnosticism is shrouded
in the deepest mystery and obscurity; for, while the Gnostics were undoubtedly
prolific writers, little of their literature has survived. They brought down upon
themselves the animosity of the early Christian Church, and when this institution reached its position of world power it destroyed all available records of the Gnostic cultus. the
name Gnostic means wisdom, or knowledge , and is derived from the Greek Gnosis. the
members of the order claimed to be familiar with the secret doctrines of early Christian-ity. they interpreted the Christian mysteries according to pagan symbolism. their secret
information and philosophic tenets they concealed from the profane and taught to a small group only of especially initiated persons.
simon magus, the magician of new testament fame, is often supposed to have been
the founder of Gnosticism. if this be true, the sect was formed during the century after
Christ and is probably the first of the many branches which have sprung from the main trunk of Christianity. Everything with which the enthusiasts of the early Christian Church might not agree they declared to be inspired by the Devil. that simon magus had mysterious and supernatural powers is conceded even by his enemies, but they maintained that these powers were lent to him by the infernal spirits and furies which they asserted were his ever present companions. undoubtedly the most interesting legend concerning simon
is that which tells of his theosophic contests with the apostle Peter while the two were
promulgating their differing doctrines in Rome. According to the story that the Church Fa-thers have preserved, simon was to prove his spiritual superiority by ascending to heaven
in a chariot of fire. He was actually picked up and carried many feet into the air by invis-ible powers. When st. Peter saw this, he cried out in a loud voice, ordering the demons
(spirits of the air) to release their hold upon the magician. The evil spirits, when so ordered by the great saint, were forced to obey. simon fell a great distance and was killed, which
decisively proved the superiority of the Christian powers. this story is undoubtedly manufactured out of whole cloth, as it is only one out of many accounts concerning his death, few of which agree. as more and more evidence is being amassed to the effect that st, Peter was never in rome, its last possible vestige of authenticity is rapidly being dissipated.
that simon was a philosopher there is no doubt, for wherever his exact words are preserved his synthetic and transcending thoughts are beautifully expressed. the principles of
Gnosticism are well described in the following verbatim statement by him, supposed to have been preserved by hippolytus:

56“to you, therefore, i say what i say, and write what i write. and the writing is
this. Of the universal Æons [periods, planes, or cycles of creative and created life in
substance and space, celestial creatures] there are two shoots, without beginning or end, springing from one root, which is the power invisible, inapprehensible silence
[Bythos]. Of these shoots one is manifested from above, which is the Great Power, the Universal Mind ordering all things, male, and the other, [is manifested] from be-low, the Great thought, female, producing all things. hence pairing with each other,
they unite and manifest the middle Distance, incomprehensible air, without beginning or end. In this is the Father Who sustains all things, and nourishes those things which have a beginning and end.” (See Simon Magus, by G. r. s. mead.)
THE DEATH OFSIMON THE MAGICIAN
.
From the Nuremberg Chronicle .
simon magus, having called upon the spir-its of the air, is here shown being picked up
by the demons. st. Peter demands that the evil genii release their hold upon the magi-cian. the demons are forced to comply and
simon magus is killed by the fall.
by this we are to understand that manifestation is the result of a positive and a negative principle, one acting upon the other, and it takes place in the middle plane, or point of equilibrium, called the pleroma. this pleroma is a peculiar substance produced out of the
blending of the spiritual and material æons. Out of the pleroma was individualized the Demiurgus, the immortal mortal, to whom we are responsible for our physical existence and

57the suffering we must go through in connection with it. in the Gnostic system, three pairs
of opposites, called Syzygies, emanated from the Eternal one. these, with himself, make
the total of seven. The six (three pairs) Æons (living, divine principles) were described by
simon in the Philosophumena in the following manner: The first two were Mind (Nous) and
Thought (Epinoia). Then came Voice (Phone) and its opposite, Name (Onoma), and lastly,
Reason (Logismos) and Reflection (Enthumesis). From these primordial six, united with the
Eternal Flame, came forth the Æons (Angels) who formed the lower worlds through the direction of the Demiurgus. (See the works of H. P. Blavatsky.) How this first Gnosticism of Simon Magus and Menander, his disciple, was amplified, and frequently distorted, by later adherents to the cult must now be considered.
the school of Gnosticism was divided into two major parts, commonly called the
syrian Cult and the alexandrian Cult. these schools agreed in essentials, but the latter
division was more inclined to be pantheistic, while the former was dualistic. While the syrian cult was largely simonian, the alexandrian school was the outgrowth of the philosophical deductions of a clever Egyptian Christian, basilides by name, who claimed to
have received his instructions from the apostle matthew. like simon magus, he was an
emanationist, with neo-Platonic inclinations. in fact, the entire Gnostic mystery is based
upon the hypothesis of emanations as being the logical connection between the irrecon-cilable opposites absolute spirit and absolute substance, which the Gnostics believed
to have been coexistent in Eternity. some assert that basilides was the true founder of
Gnosticism, but there is much evidence to the effect that simon magus laid down its fundamental principles in the preceding century.
the alexandrian basilides inculcated Egyptian hermeticism, oriental occultism,
Chaldean astrology, and Persian philosophy in his followers, and in his doctrines sought to unite the schools of early Christianity with the ancient pagan mysteries. to him is attributed the formulation of that peculiar concept of the Deity which carries the name of abraxas. in discussing the original meaning of this word, Godfrey higgins, in his Celtic
Druids, has demonstrated that the numerological powers of the letters forming the word Abraxas when added together result in the sum of 365. The same author also notes that the name mithras when treated in a similar manner has the same numerical value. basilides
caught that the powers of the universe were divided into 365 Æons, or spiritual cycles, and that the sum of all these together was the Supreme Father, and to Him he gave the Qabbal-istical appellation Abraxas, as being symbolical, numerologically, of his divine powers,
attributes, and emanations. Abraxas is usually symbolized as a composite creature, with
the body of a human being and the head of a rooster, and with each of his legs ending in a serpent. C. W. King, in his Gnostics and Their Remains, gives the following concise
description of the Gnostic philosophy of Basilides, quoting from the writings of the early Christian bishop and martyr, St. Irenæus:
“He asserted that God, the uncreated, eternal Father, had first brought forth
nous, or mind; this the logos, Word; this again Phronesis, intelligence; from
Phronesis sprung sophia, Wisdom, and Dynamis, strength.”
In describing Abraxas, C. W. King says:

58“bellermann considers the composite image, inscribed with the actual name
Abraxas, to be a Gnostic Pantheos, representing the Supreme Being, with the Five
Emanations marked out by appropriate symbols. From the human body, the usual form assigned to the Deity, spring the two supporters, nous and logos, expressed
in the serpents, symbols of the inner senses, and the quickening understanding; on which account the Greeks had made the serpent the attribute of Pallas. his head –
that of a cock – represents Phronesis, that bird being the emblem of foresight and of vigilance. his two arms hold the symbols of sophia and Dynamis: the shield of
Wisdom and the whip of Power.”
THE LION-FACED LIGHT-POWER .
From Montfaucon’ s Antiquities .
this Gnostic gem represents by its serpentine body the pathway of the sun and by its lion head the exaltation of the solar in the constellation of leo.
the Gnostics were divided in their opinions concerning the Demiurgus, or creator of
the lower worlds. he established the terrestrial universe with the aid of six sons, or emanations (possibly the planetary Angels) which He formed out of, and yet within, Himself. As stated before, the Demiurgus was individualized as the lowest creation out of the sub-stance called pleroma. one group of the Gnostics was of the opinion that the Demiurgus
was the cause of all misery and was an evil creature, who by building this lower world had separated the souls of men from truth by encasing them in mortal vehicles. the other
sect viewed the Demiurgus as being divinely inspired and merely fulfilling the dictates of the invisible Lord. Some Gnostics were of the opinion that the Jewish God, Jehovah,
was the Demiurgus. This concept, under a slightly different name, apparently influenced mediæval Rosicrucianism, which viewed Jehovah as the Lord of the material universe