The Ancient Mysteries and
Secret Societies
Part Three
ThE MOST FAMOUS OF THE ANCIENT RELIGIOUS mysteries were the
Eleusinian, whose rites were celebrated every five years in the city of Eleusis
to honor Ceres (Demeter, Rhea, or Isis) and her daughter, Persephone. The
initiates of the Eleusinian school were famous throughout Greece for the beauty of their
philosophic concepts and the high standards of morality which they demonstrated in their daily lives. because of their excellence, these mysteries spread to rome and britain, and
later the initiations were given in both these countries. the Eleusinian mysteries, named
for the community in Attica where the sacred dramas were first presented, are generally believed to have been founded by Eumolpos about fourteen hundred years before the birth of Christ, and through the Platonic system of philosophy their principles have been preserved to modern times.
the rites of Eleusis, with their mystic interpretations of nature’s most precious secrets, overshadowed the civilizations of their time and gradually absorbed many smaller schools, incorporating into their own system whatever valuable information these lesser institutions possessed. heckethorn sees in the mysteries of Ceres and bacchus a metamorphosis of the rites of isis and osiris, and there is every reason to believe that all so-called
secret schools of the ancient world were branches from one philosophic tree which, with its root in heaven and its branches on the earth, is – like the spirit of man – an invisible but ever-present cause of the objectified vehicles that give it expression. The Mysteries were the channels through which this one philosophic light was disseminated, and their initiates, resplendent with intellectual and spiritual understanding, were the perfect fruit-age of the divine tree, bearing witness before the material world of the recondite source of all light and truth.
the rites of Eleusis were divided into what were called the lesser and the Greater Mysteries. According to James Gardner, the Lesser Mysteries were celebrated in the spring (probably at the time of the vernal equinox) in the town of Agræ, and the Greater, in the fall (the time of the autumnal equinox) at Eleusis or Athens. It is supposed that the former were given annually and the latter every five years. The rituals of the Eleusinians were highly involved, and to understand them required a deep study of Greek mythology, which they interpreted in its esoteric light with the aid of their secret keys.
the lesser mysteries were dedicated to Persephone. in his Eleusinian and Bacchic
Mysteries, thomas taylor sums up their purpose as follows: “the lesser mysteries were

69designed by the ancient theologists, their founders, to signify occultly the condition of the unpurified soul invested with an earthy body, and enveloped in a material and physical nature.”
the legend used in the lesser rites is that of the abduction of the goddess Persephone,
the daughter of Ceres, by Pluto, the lord of the underworld, or hades. While Persephone
is picking flowers in a beautiful meadow, the earth suddenly opens and the gloomy lord of death, riding in a magnificent chariot, emerges from its somber depths and, grasping her in his arms, carries the screaming and struggling goddess to his subterranean palace, where he forces her to become his queen.
it is doubtful whether many of the initiates themselves understood the mystic meaning of this allegory, for most of them apparently believed that it referred solely to the succession of the seasons. It is difficult to obtain satisfactory information concerning the mysteries, for the candidates were bound by inviolable oaths never to reveal their inner secrets to the profane. at the beginning of the ceremony of initiation, the candidate stood
upon the skins of animals sacrificed for the purpose, and vowed that death should seal his lips before he would divulge the sacred truths which were about to be communicated to him. through indirect channels, however, some of their secrets have been preserved. the
teachings given to the neophytes were substantially as follows:
the soul of man – often called Psyche, and in the Eleusinian Mysteries symbolized by
Persephone – is essentially a spiritual thing. its true home is in the higher worlds, where,
free from the bondage of material form and material concepts, it is said to be truly alive and self-expressive. the human, or physical, nature of man, according to this doctrine, is
a tomb, a quagmire, a false and impermanent thing, the source of all sorrow and suffering. Plato describes the body as the sepulcher of the soul; and by this he means not only the human form but also the human nature.
the gloom and depression of the lesser mysteries represented the agony of the spiritual soul unable to express itself because it has accepted the limitations and illusions of the human environment. the crux of the Eleusinian argument was that man is neither better nor wiser after death than during life. if he does not rise above ignorance during his
sojourn here, man goes at death into eternity to wander about forever, making the same mistakes which he made here. if he does not outgrow the desire for material possessions
here, he will carry it with him into the invisible world, where, because he can never gratify the desire, he will continue in endless agony. Dante’s Inferno is symbolically descriptive
of the sufferings of those who never freed their spiritual natures from the cravings, habits, viewpoints, and limitations of their Plutonic personalities. those who made no endeavor
to improve themselves (whose souls have slept) during their physical lives, passed at death into hades, where, lying in rows, they slept through all eternity as they had slept
through life.
to the Eleusinian philosophers, birch into the physical world was death in the fullest
sense of the word, and the only true birth was that of the spiritual soul of man rising out of the womb of his own fleshly nature. “The soul is dead that slumbers,” says Longfellow, and in this he strikes the keynote of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Just as Narcissus, gazing at himself in the water (the ancients used this mobile element to symbolize the transitory, il-lusionary, material universe) lost his life trying to embrace a reflection, so man, gazing into

70the mirror of Nature and accepting as his real self the senseless clay that he sees reflect -
ed, loses the opportunity afforded by physical life to unfold his immortal, invisible self.
an ancient initiate once said that the living are ruled by the dead. only those conversant with the Eleusinian concept of life could understand that statement. it means that the
majority of people are not ruled by their living spirits but by their senseless (hence dead)
animal personalities. transmigration and reincarnation were taught in these mysteries,
but in a somewhat unusual manner. it was believed that at midnight the invisible worlds
were closest to the terrestrial sphere and that souls coming into material existence slipped
in during the midnight hour. For this reason many of the Eleusinian ceremonies were performed at midnight. some of those sleeping spirits who had failed to awaken their
higher natures during the earth life and who now floated around in the invisible worlds, surrounded by a darkness of their own making, occasionally slipped through at this hour and assumed the forms of various creatures.
THE RAPE OF PERSEPHONE.From Thomassin’s Recucil des Figures, Groupes,
Themes, Fontaines, Vases et autres Ornements.
Pluto, the lord of the underworld, represents the
body intelligence of man; and the rape of Perse-phone is symbolic of the divine nature assaulted and defiled by the animal soul and dragged down -
ward into the somber darkness of hades, which is here used as a synonym for the material, or objec-tive, sphere of consciousness.in his Disquisitions upon the Painted Greek Vases, James Christie presents Meursius’ version of the occurrences taking place during the nine days re-quired for the enactment of the Greater Eleusinian Rites. The first day was that of general meeting, during which those to be initiated were questioned concerning their several qualifications. The second day was spent in a procession to the sea, possibly for the submerging of a image of the presiding goddess. The third day was opened by the sacrifice of a mullet. on the fourth day the mystic basket containing certain sacred symbols was brought to Eleusis, accompanied by a number of female devo-tees carrying smaller baskets. on the evening of the fifth day there was a torch race, on the sixth a pro -
cession led by a statue of iacchus, and on the seventh an athletic contest. the eighth day was devoted to
a repetition of the ceremonial for the benefit of any who might have been prevented from coming sooner .
the ninth and last day was devoted to the deepest philosophical issues of the Eleusinia, during which an urn or jar – the symbol of bacchus – was exhibited as an emblem of supreme importance.

71the mystics of Eleusis also laid stress upon the evil of suicide, explaining that there
was a profound mystery concerning this crime of which they could not speak, but warning their disciples that a great sorrow comes to all who take their own lives. this, in substance, constitutes the esoteric doctrine given to the initiates of the lesser mysteries. as
the degree dealt largely with the miseries of those who failed to make the best use of their philosophic opportunities, the chambers of initiation were subterranean and the horrors of hades were vividly depicted in a complicated ritualistic drama. after passing successfully
through the tortuous passageways, with their trials and dangers, the candidate received the honorary title of Mystes. this meant one who saw through a veil or had a clouded vision.
It also signified that the candidate had been brought up to the veil, which would be torn away in the higher degree. the modern word mystic, as referring to a seeker after truth
according to the dictates of the heart along the path of faith, is probably derived from this ancient word, for faith is belief in the reality of things unseen or veiled.
The Greater Mysteries (into which the candidate was admitted only after he had successfully passed through the ordeals of the lesser, and not always then) were sacred to Ceres,
the mother of Persephone, and represent her as wandering through the world in quest of her abducted daughter. Ceres carried two torches, intuition and reason, to aid her in the search for her lost child (the soul). At last she found Persephone not far from Eleusis, and out of gratitude taught the people there to cultivate corn, which is sacred to her. she also founded
the mysteries. Ceres appeared before
Pluto, god of the souls of the dead, and pleaded with him to allow Persephone to return to her home. This the god at first re-fused to do, because Persephone had eaten of the pomegranate, the fruit of mortality. at last, however, he compromised and
agreed to permit Persephone to live in the upper world half of the year if she would stay with him in the darkness of hades for
the remaining half.
CERES,
THE PATRON OF THE MYSTERIES .
From a mural painting in Pompeii.
Ceres, or Demeter, was the daughter of Kronos
and rhea, and by Zeus the mother of Persephone.
some believe her to be the goddess of the earth,
but more correctly she is the deity protecting
agriculture in general and corn in particular. the
Poppy is sacred to Ceres and she is often shown
carrying or ornamented by a garland of these
flowers. In the Mysteries, Ceres represented riding in a chariot drawn by winged serpents.