The Ancient Mysteries and
Secret Societies
Which Have Influenced Modern Masonic Symbolism
WHEN CONFRONTED WITH A PROBLEM involving the use of the reasoning faculties, individuals of strong intellect keep their poise, and seek to reach
a solution by obtaining facts bearing upon the question. Those of immature
mentality, on the other hand, when similarly confronted, are overwhelmed. While the former may be qualified to solve the riddle of their own destiny, the latter must be led like a flock of sheep and taught in simple language. They depend almost entirely upon the ministrations of the shepherd. the apostle Paul said that these little ones must be fed with
milk, but that meat is the food of strong men. thoughtlessness is almost synonymous with
childishness, while thought fulness is symbolic of maturity.
there are, however, but few mature minds in the world; and thus it was that the philosophic-religious doctrines of the pagans were divided to meet the needs of these two fun-damental groups of human intellect – one philosophic, the other incapable of appreciating the deeper mysteries of life. to the discerning few were revealed the esoteric, or spiritual,
teachings, while the unqualified many received only the literal, or exoteric , interpretations. in order to make simple the great truths of nature and the abstract principles of
natural law, the vital forces of the universe were personified, becoming the gods and god-desses of the ancient mythologies. While the ignorant multitudes brought their offerings to the altars of Priapus and Pan (deities representing the procreative energies), the wise recognized in these marble statues only symbolic concretions of great abstract truths.
in all cities of the ancient world were temples for public worship and offering. in every community also were philosophers and mystics, deeply versed in nature’s lore. these
individuals were usually banded together, forming seclusive philosophic and religious schools. the more important of these groups were known as the Mysteries. many of the
great minds of antiquity were initiated into these secret fraternities by strange and myste-rious rites, some of which were extremely cruel. Alexander Wilder defines the Mysteries as “sacred dramas performed at stated periods. the most celebrated were those of isis,
Sabazius, Cybele, and Eleusis.” After being admitted, the initiates were instructed in the secret wisdom which had been preserved for ages. Plato, an initiate of one of these sacred orders, was severely criticized because in his writings he revealed to the public many of the secret philosophic principles of the mysteries.
Every pagan nation had (and has) not only its state religion, but another into which the
philosophic elect alone have gained entrance. many of these ancient cults vanished from
the earth without revealing their secrets, but a few have survived the test of ages and their

43mysterious symbols are still preserved. Much of the ritualism of Freemasonry is based on
the trials to which candidates were subjected by the ancient hierophants before the keys of wisdom were entrusted to them.
Few realize the extent to which the ancient secret schools influenced contemporary intellects and, through those minds, posterity. Robert Macoy, 33°, in his General History of
Freemasonry, pays a magnificent tribute to the part played by the ancient Mysteries in the rearing of the edifice of human culture. He says, in part: “It appears that all the perfection of civilization, and all the advancement made in philosophy, science, and art among the ancients are due to those institutions which, under the veil of mystery, sought to illustrate the sublimest truths of religion, morality, and virtue, and impress them on the hearts of their disciples.(...) Their chief object was to teach the doctrine of one God, the resurrec-tion of man to eternal life, the dignity of the human soul, and to lead the people to see the shadow of the deity, in the beauty, magnificence, and splendor of the universe.”
With the decline of virtue, which has preceded the destruction of every nation of history, the mysteries became perverted. sorcery took the place of the divine magic. indescribable practices (such as the Bacchanalia) were introduced, and perversion ruled supreme; for no institution can be any better than the members of which it is composed. in despair, the few who were true sought to preserve the secret doctrines from oblivion. in
some cases they succeeded, but more often the arcanum was lost and only the empty shell of the mysteries remained.
Thomas Taylor has written, “Man is naturally a religious animal.” From the earliest
dawning of his consciousness, man has worshiped and revered things as symbolic of the
invisible, omnipresent, indescribable Thing, concerning which he could discover practically nothing. the pagan mysteries opposed the Christians during the early centuries of
their church, declaring that the new faith (Christianity) did not demand virtue and integ -
rity as requisites for salvation. Celsus expressed himself on the subject in the following caustic terms:
“that i do not, however, accuse the Christians more bitterly than truth compels,
may be conjectured from hence, that the cryers who call men to other mysteries proclaim as follows: ‘let him approach whose hands are pure, and whose words are wise.’ and again, others proclaim: ‘let him approach who is pure from all
wickedness, whose soul is not conscious of any evil, and who leads a just and upright life.’ And these things are proclaimed by those who promise a purification from error. let us now hear who those are that are called to the Christian mysteries:
Whoever is a sinner, whoever is unwise, whoever is a fool, and whoever, in short, is miserable, him the kingdom of God will receive. Do you not, therefore, call a sinner, an unjust man, a thief, a housebreaker, a wizard, one who is sacrilegious, and a robber of sepulchres? What other persons would the cryer nominate, who should call robbers together?”
it was not the true faith of the early Christian mystics that Celsus attacked, but the false
forms that were creeping in even during his day. the ideals of early Christianity were based

44upon the high moral standards of the pagan Mysteries, and the first Christians who met
under the city of rome used as their places of worship the subterranean temples of mith-ras, from whose cult has been borrowed much of the sacerdotalism of the modem church.
the ancient philosophers believed that no man could live intelligently who did not
have a fundamental knowledge of nature and her laws. before man can obey, he must understand, and the mysteries were devoted to instructing man concerning the operation of
divine law in the terrestrial sphere. Few of the early cults actually worshiped anthropomor -
phic deities, although their symbolism might lead one to believe they did. they were moralistic rather than religionistic; philosophic rather than theologic. they taught man to use
his faculties more intelligently, to be patient in the face of adversity, to be courageous when confronted by danger, to be true in the midst of temptation, and, most of all, to view a wor-thy life as the most acceptable sacrifice to God, and his body as an altar sacred to the Deity.
A FEMALE HIEROPHANTOF THE MYSTERIES.From Montfaucon’s Antiquities.
this illustration shows Cybele, here called the
syrian Goddess, in the robes of a hierophant. Montfaucon describes the figure as follows: “upon her head is an episcopal mitre, adorned on the lower part with towers and pinnacles; over the gate of the city is a crescent, and be-neath the circuit of the walls a crown of rays. the Goddess wears a sort of surplice, exactly like the surplice of a priest or bishop; and upon the surplice a tunic, which falls down to the legs; and over all an episcopal cope, with the twelve signs of the Zodiac wrought on the bor-ders. The figure hath a lion on each side, and holds in its left hand a tympanum, a sistrum, a
Distaff, a Caduceus, and another instrument. in her right hand she holds with her middle finger a thunderbolt, and upon the same am animals, insects, and, as far as we may guess, flowers, fruit, a bow, a quiver, a torch, and a scythe.” The whereabouts of the statue is unknown, the copy reproduced by montfaucon being from drawings by Pirro ligorio.
sun worship played an important part in nearly all the early pagan mysteries. this
indicates the probability of their atlantean origin, for the people of atlantis were sun worshipers. The Solar Deity was usually personified as a beautiful youth, with long golden hair to symbolize the rays of the sun. This golden Sun God was slain by wicked ruffians, who personified the evil principle of the universe. By means of certain rituals and ceremo-nies, symbolic of purification and regeneration, this wonderful God of Good was brought

45back to life and became the savior of his people. the secret processes whereby he was
resurrected symbolized those cultures by means of which man is able to overcome his
lower nature, master his appetites, and give expression to the higher side of himself. the
Mysteries were organized for the purpose of assisting the struggling human creature to reawaken the spiritual powers which, surrounded by the flaming ring of lust and degen-eracy, lay asleep within his soul. in other words, man was offered a way by which he could
regain his lost estate. (See Wagner’s Siegfried .)
in the ancient world, nearly all the secret societies were philosophic and religious.
During the mediæval centuries, they were chiefly religious and political, although a few philosophic schools remained. in modern times, secret societies, in the occidental countries, are largely political or fraternal, although in a few of them, as in masonry, the ancient religious and philosophic principles still survive.
space prohibits a detailed discussion of the secret schools. there were literally scores
of these ancient cults, with branches in all parts of the Eastern and Western worlds. some,
such as those of Pythagoras and the Hermetists, show a decided Oriental influence, while the rosicrucians, according to their own proclamations, gained much of their wisdom from
Arabian mystics. Although the Mystery schools are usually associated with civilization, there is evidence that the most uncivilized peoples of prehistoric times had a knowledge of them. natives of distant islands, many in the lowest forms of savagery, have mystic rituals
and secret practices which, although primitive, are of a decided masonic tinge.
THE DRUIDIC MYSTERIES OF BRITAIN AND GAUL
“the original and primitive inhabitants of britain, at some remote period, revived and reformed their national institutes. their priest, or instructor, had hitherto
been simply named Gwydd, but it was considered to have become necessary to divide this office between the national, or superior, priest and another whose in-fluence [would] be more limited. From henceforth the former became Der-Wydd (Druid), or superior instructor, and [the latter] Go-Wydd, or O-Vydd (Ovate), sub-ordinate instructor; and both went by the general name of Beirdd (Bards), or teach -
ers of wisdom. as the system matured and augmented, the bardic order consisted
of three classes, the Druids, Beirdd Braint, or privileged Bards, and Ovates.” (See samuel meyrick and Charles smith, The Costume of The Original Inhabitants of
The British Islands.)
the origin of the word Druid is under dispute. max müller believes that, like the irish
word Drui, it means “the men of the oak trees.” he further draws attention to the fact that
the forest gods and tree deities of the Greeks were called dryades. some believe the word
to be of teutonic origin; others ascribe it to the Welsh. a few trace it to the Gaelic druidh,
which means “a wise man” or “a sorcerer.” in sanskrit the word dru means “timber.”
At the time of the Roman conquest, the Druids were thoroughly ensconced in Britain
and Gaul. Their power over the people was unquestioned, and there were instances in which armies, about to attack each other, sheathed their swords when ordered to do so by