Hermetic
Pharmacology, Chemistry,
and Therapeutics
ThE ART OF HEALING was originally one of the secret sciences of the priestcraft, and the mystery of its source is obscured by the same veil which hides
the genesis of religious belief. all higher forms of knowledge were originally
in the possession of the sacerdotal castes. The temple was the cradle of civilization. The priests, exercising their divine prerogative, made the laws and enforced them; appointed the rulers and controlled than; ministered to the needs of the living, and guided the des-tinies of the dead. All branches of learning were monopolized by the priesthood, who admitted into their ranks only those intellectually and morally qualified to perpetuate their arcanum. The following quotation from Plato’s Statesman is apropos of the subject:
“ (...) in Egypt, the King himself is not allowed to reign, unless he have priestly
powers; and if he should be one of another class, and have obtained the throne by violence, he must get enrolled in the priestcraft.”
Candidates aspiring to membership in the religious orders underwent severe tests to
prove their worthiness. these ordeals were called initiations . those who passed them
successfully were welcomed as brothers by the priests and were instructed in the secret
teachings. among the ancients, philosophy, science, and religion were never considered
as separate units: each was regarded as an integral part of the whole. Philosophy was sci-entific and religious; science was philosophic and religious I religion was philosophic and scientific. Perfect wisdom was considered unattainable save as the result of harmonizing all three of these expressions of mental and moral activity.
While modern physicians accredit hippocrates with being the father of medicine, the
ancient therapeutæ ascribed to the immortal hermes the distinction of being the founder
of the art of healing. Clemens alexandrinus, in describing the books purported to be from
the stylus of Hermes, divided the sacred writings into six general classifications, one of which, the Pastophorus, was devoted to the science of medicine. the Smaragdine, or Emerald tablet found in the valley of Ebron and generally accredited to hermes, is in reality
a chemical formula of a high and secret order.
Hippocrates, the famous Greek physician, during the fifth century before Christ, dissociated the healing art from the other sciences of the temple and thereby established a prec-edent for separateness. One of the consequences is the present widespread crass scientific materialism. The ancients realized the interdependence of the sciences. The moderns do

334not; and as a result, incomplete systems of learning are attempting to maintain isolated individualism. The obstacles which confront present-day scientific research are largely the result of prejudicial limitations imposed by those who are unwilling to accept that which transcends the concrete perceptions of the five primary human senses.
THE PARACELSIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICAL PHILOSOPHY
During the Middle Ages the long-ignored axioms and formulæ of Hermetic wisdom
were assembled once more, and chronicled, and systematic attempts were made to test their accuracy. to theophrastus of hohenheim, who called himself Paracelsus (a name
meaning “greater than Celsus”), the world is indebted for much of the knowledge it now possesses of the ancient systems of medicine. Paracelsus devoted his entire life to the study and exposition of hermetic philosophy. Every notion and theory was grist to his
mill, and, while members of the medical fraternity belittle his memory now as they op-posed his system then, the occult world knows that he will yet be recognized as the great -
est physician of all times. While the heterodox and exotic temperament of Paracelsus has been held against him by his enemies, and his wanderlust has been called vagabondage, he was one of the few minds who intelligently sought to reconcile the art of healing with the philosophic and religious systems of paganism and Christianity.
in defending his right to seek knowledge in all parts of the earth, and among all classes
of society, Paracelsus wrote:
“therefore i consider that it is for me a matter of praise, not of blame, that i
have hitherto and worthily pursued my wanderings. For this will I bear witness respecting nature: he who will investigate her ways must travel her books with his feet. that which is written is investigated through its letters, but nature from land
to land-as often a land so often a leaf. thus is the Codex of nature, thus must its
leaves be turned.” ( Paracelsus, by John Maxson Stillman.)
Paracelsus was a great observationalist, and those who knew him best have called him
“The Second Hermes” and “The Trismegistus of Switzerland.” He traveled Europe from end to end, and may have penetrated Eastern lands while running down superstitions and ferreting out supposedly lost doctrines. From the gypsies he learned much concerning the uses of simples, and apparently from the arabians concerning the making of talismans and
the influences of the heavenly bodies. Paracelsus felt that the healing of the sick was of far greater importance than the maintaining of an orthodox medical standing, so he sacrificed what might otherwise have been a dignified medical career and at the cost of lifelong per -
secution bitterly attacked the therapeutic systems of his day.
uppermost in his mind was the hypothesis that everything in the universe is good for
something – which accounts for his cutting fungus from tombstones and collecting dew on glass plates at midnight. he was a true explorer of nature’s arcanum. many authorities
have held the opinion that he was the discoverer of mesmerism, and that mesmer evolved
the art as the result of studying the writings of this great swiss physician.

335the utter contempt which Paracelsus felt for the narrow systems of medicine in vogue
during his lifetime, and his conviction of their inadequacy, are best expressed in his own
quaint way:
“but the number of diseases that originate from some unknown causes is far
greater than those that come from mechanical causes, and for such diseases our physicians know no cure because not knowing such causes they cannot remove them. all they can prudently do is to observe the patient and make their guesses
about his condition; and the patient may rest satisfied if the medicines administered to him do no serious harm, and do not prevent his recovery. the best of our popular
physicians are the ones that do least harm. but, unfortunately, some poison their
patients with mercury, others purge them or bleed them to death. there are some
who have learned so much that their learning has driven out all their common sense, and a there are others who care a great: deal more for their own profit than for the health of their patients. a disease does not change its state to accommodate
itself to the knowledge of the physician, but the physician should understand the causes of the disease. a physician should be a servant of nature, and not her enemy; he should be able to guide and direct her in her struggle for life and not throw, by his unreasonable interference, fresh obstacles in the way of recovery.” (From the Paragranum, translated by Franz Hartmann.)
the belief that nearly all diseases have their origin in the invisible nature of man
(the Astrum) is a fundamental precept of Hermetic medicine, for while Hermetists in no way disregarded the physical body, they believed that man’s material constitution was an emanation from, or an objectification of, his invisible spiritual principles. A brief, but it is believed fairly comprehensive, résumé of the hermetic principles of Paracelsus follows.
there is one vital substance in nature upon which all things subsist. it is called archæus,
or vital life force, and is synonymous with the astral light or spiritual air of the ancients.
in regard to this substance, Eliphas levi has written:
“light, that creative agent, the vibrations of which are the movement and life
of all things; light, latent in the universal ether, radiating about absorbing centres, which, being saturated thereby, project movement and life in their turn, so forming creative currents; light, astralized in the stars, animalized in animals, humanized in human beings; light, which vegetates all plants, glistens in metals, produces all forms of Nature and equilibrates all by the laws of universal sympathy – this is the light which exhibits the phenomena of magnetism, divined by Paracelsus, which tinctures the blood, being released from the air as it is inhaled and discharged by the hermetic bellows of the lungs.” ( The History of Magic.)
this vital energy has its origin in the spiritual body of the earth. Every created thing
has two bodies, one visible and substantial, the other invisible and transcendent. the latter consists of an ethereal counterpart of the physical form; it constitutes the vehicle of

336archæus, and may be called a vital body. this etheric shadow sheath is not dissipated by
death, but remains until the physical form is entirely disintegrated. these “etheric doubles, “seen around graveyards, have given rise to a belief in ghosts. Being much finer in
its substances than the earthly body, the etheric double is far more susceptible to impulses and inharmonies. it is derangements of this astral light body that cause much disease.
Paracelsus taught that a person with a morbid mental attitude could poison his own etheric nature, and this infection, diverting the natural flow of vital life force, would later appear
as a physical ailment. all plants and minerals have an invisible nature composed of this
“archæus,” but each manifests it in a different way.
THE TITLE PAGE OFTHE BOOK OF ALZE.From Musæum HermeticumReformatum et Amplificatum.
this title page is a further example of
hermetic and alchemical symbolism.
the seven-pointed star of the sacred
metals is arranged that one black
point is downward, thus symbolizing saturn, the Destroyer. beginning in
the space immediately to the left of the black point, reading clockwise discloses the cryptic word vitriol
formed by the capital letters of the seven latin words in the outer circle.
Concerning the astral-light bodies of flowers, James Gaffarel, in 1650, wrote the
following:
“i answer, that though they be chopt in pieces, brayed in a mortar, and even
burnt to Ashes; yet do they neverthelesse retaine, (by a certaine Secret, and won-derfull Power of Nature), both in the Juyce, and in the Ashes, the selfe same Forme, and Figure, that they had before: and though it be not there Visible, yet it