107The Initiation
of the Pyramid
SuPrEmE amonG thE WonDErs of antiquity, unrivaled by the achieve -
ments of later architects and builders, the Great Pyramid of Gizeh bears mute
witness to an unknown civilization which, having completed its predestined
span, passed into oblivion. Eloquent in its silence, inspiring in its majesty, divine in its simplicity, the Great Pyramid is indeed a sermon in stone. its magnitude overwhelms the
puny sensibilities of man. Among the shifting sands of time it stands as a fitting emblem of eternity itself. Who were the illumined mathematicians who planned its parts and di-mensions, the master craftsmen who supervised its construction, the skilled artisans who trued its blocks of stone?
the earliest and best-known account of the building of the Great Pyramid is that given
by that highly revered but somewhat imaginative historian, herodotus.
“the pyramid was built in steps, battlement-wise, as it is called, or, according
to others, altar-wise. after laying the stones for the base, they raised the remaining
stones to their places by means of machines formed of short wooden planks. the
first machine raised them from the ground to the top of the first step. On this there was another machine, which received the stone upon its arrival, and conveyed it to the second step, whence a third machine advanced it still higher. Either they had as many machines as there were steps in the pyramid, or possibly they had but a single machine, which, being easily moved, was transferred from tier to tier as the stone rose. both accounts are given, and therefore i mention both. the upper portion of the pyramid was finished first, then the middle, and finally the part which was lowest and nearest the ground. there is an inscription in Egyptian characters
on the pyramid which records the quantity of radishes, onions, and garlick con-sumed by the labourers who constructed it; and i perfectly well remember that the
interpreter who read the writing to me said that the money expended in this way was 1600 talents of silver. If this then is a true record, what a vast sum must have been spent on the iron tools used in the work, and on the feeding and clothing of the labourers, considering the length of time the work lasted, which has already been stated [ten years], and the additional time – no small space, I imagine – which must have been occupied by the quarrying of the stones, their conveyance, and the formation of the underground apartments.”
While his account is extremely colorful, it is apparent that the Father of History,
for reasons which he doubtless considered sufficient, concocted a fraudulent story to

108conceal the true origin and purpose of the Great Pyramid. this is but one of several instances in his writings which would lead the thoughtful reader to suspect that herodotus
himself was an initiate of the Sacred Schools and consequently obligated to preserve
inviolate the secrets of the ancient orders. the theory advanced by herodotus and now
generally accepted that the Pyramid was the tomb of the Pharaoh Cheops cannot be sub-stantiated. in fact, manetho, Eratosthenes, and Diodorus siculus all differ from herodotus – as well as from each other – regarding the name of the builder of this supreme edifice. The sepulchral vault, which, according to the Lepsius Law of pyramid con-struction, should have been finished at the same time as the monument or sooner, was never completed. there is no proof that the building was erected by the Egyptians, for
the elaborate carvings with which the burial chambers of Egyptian royalty are almost invariably ornamented are entirely lacking and it embodies none of the elements of their architecture or decoration, such as inscriptions, images, cartouches, paintings, and other distinctive features associated with dynastic mortuary art. the only hieroglyphics to be
found within the Pyramid are a few builders’ marks sealed up in the chambers of construction, first opened by Howard Vyse. These apparently were painted upon the stones before they were set in position, for in a number of instances the marks were either inverted or disfigured by the operation of fitting the blocks together. While Egyptolo-gists have attempted to identify the crude dabs of paint as cartouches of Cheops, it is almost inconceivable that this ambitious ruler would have permitted his royal name to suffer such indignities. as the most eminent authorities on the subject are still uncertain
as to the true meaning of these crude markings, whatever proof they might be that the building was erected during the fourth dynasty is certainly offset by the sea shells at the base of the Pyramid which mr. Gab advances as evidence that it was erected before the
Deluge – a theory substantiated by the much-abused arabian traditions. one arabian
historian declared that the Pyramid was built by the Egyptian sages as a refuge against the Flood, while another proclaimed it to have been the treasure house of the powerful antediluvian king sheddad ben ad. a panel of hieroglyphs over the entrance, which the
casual observer might consider to afford a solution of the mystery, unfortunately dates back no further than A.D. 1843, having been cut at that time by Dr. Lepsius as a tribute to the King of Prussia.
Caliph al mamoun, an illustrious descendant of the Prophet, inspired by stories of the
immense treasures sealed within its depths, journeyed from Bagdad to Cairo, A.D. 820, with a great force of workmen to open the mighty Pyramid. When Caliph al mamoun
first reached the foot of the “Rock of Ages” and gazed up at its smooth glistening surface, a tumult of emotions undoubtedly racked his soul. the casing stones must have been in
place at the time of his visit, for the Caliph could find no indication of an entrance – four perfectly smooth surfaces confronted him. Following vague rumors, he set his followers to work on the north side of the Pyramid, with instructions to keep on cutting and chisel-ing until they discovered something. to the moslems with their crude instruments and
vinegar it was a herculean effort to tunnel a full hundred feet through the limestone. many
times they were on the point of rebellion, but the word of the Caliph was law and the hope of a vast fortune buoyed them up.

109at last on the eve of total discouragement fate came to their rescue. a great stone was
heard to fall somewhere in the wall near the toiling and disgruntled arabs. Pushing on toward the sound with renewed enthusiasm, they finally broke into the descending passage
which leads into the subterranean chamber. they then chiseled their way around the great
stone portcullis which had fallen into a position barring their progress, and attacked and removed one after another the granite plugs which for a while continued to slide down the passage leading from the Queen’s Chamber above.
Finally no more blocks descended and the way was clear for the followers of the
Prophet. But where were the treasures? From room to room the frantic workmen rushed, looking in vain for loot. the discontent of the moslems reached such a height that Caliph
al mamoun – who had inherited much of the wisdom of his illustrious father, the Caliph
al raschid – sent to bagdad for funds, which he caused to be secretly buried near the
entrance of the Pyramid. he then ordered his men to dig at that spot and great was their
rejoicing when the treasure was discovered, the workmen being deeply impressed by the wisdom of the antediluvian monarch who had carefully estimated their wages and thoughtfully caused the exact amount to be buried for their benefit!
the Caliph then returned to the city of his fathers and the Great Pyramid was left to
the mercy of succeeding generations. in the ninth century the sun’s rays striking the highly
polished surfaces of the original casing stones caused each side of the Pyramid to appear as a dazzling triangle of light. Since that time, all but two of these casing stones have dis-appeared. investigation has resulted in their discovery, recut and resurfaced, in the walls
of Mohammedan mosques and palaces in various parts of Cairo and its environs.
PYRAMID PROBLEMS
C. Piazzi Smyth asks: “Was the Great Pyramid, then, erected before the invention
of hieroglyphics, and previous to the birth of the Egyptian religion?” time may yet
prove that the upper chambers of the Pyramid were a sealed mystery before the es-tablishment of the Egyptian empire. in the subterranean chamber, however, are markings which indicate that the romans gained admission there. in the light of the secret
philosophy of the Egyptian initiates, W. W. harmon, by a series of extremely complicated yet exact mathematical calculations; determines that the first ceremonial of the Pyramid was performed 68,890 years ago on the occasion when the star Vega for the first time sent its ray down the descending passage into the pit. The actual building of the Pyramid was accomplished in the period of from ten to fifteen years immediately preceding this date.
While such figures doubtless will evoke the ridicule of modern Egyptologists, they
are based upon an exhaustive study of the principles of sidereal mechanics as incorpo-rated into the structure of the Pyramid by its initiated builders. if the casing stones were
in position at the beginning of the ninth century, the so-called erosion marks upon the outside were not due to water. the theory also that the salt upon the interior stones of the
Pyramid is evidence that the building was once submerged is weakened by the scientific fact that this kind of stone is subject to exudations of salt. While the building may have

110been submerged, at least in part, during the many thousands of years since its erection, the
evidence adduced to prove this point is not conclusive.
the Great Pyramid was built of limestone and granite throughout, the two kinds of
rock being combined in a peculiar and significant manner. The stones were trued with the utmost precision, and the cement used was of such remarkable quality that it is now practically as hard as the stone itself. The limestone blocks were sawed with bronze saws, the teeth of which were diamonds or other jewels. the chips from the stones were piled
against the north side of the plateau on which the structure stands, where they form an ad-ditional buttress to aid in supporting the weight of the structure. the entire Pyramid is an
example of perfect orientation and actually squares the circle. This last is accomplished by dropping a vertical line from the apex of the Pyramid to its base line. if this vertical line be
considered as the radius of an imaginary circle, the length of the circumference of such a circle will be found to equal the sum of the base lines of the four sides of the Pyramid.
A VERTICAL SECTION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
From Smyth’s Life and Wok at the Great Pyramid .
the Great Pyramid stands upon a limestone plateau at the base of which, according to ancient history,
the Nile once flooded, thus supplying a method for the huge blocks used in its construction. Presuming that the capstone as originally in place, the Pyramid is, according to John Taylor, in round figures 486 feet high; the base of each side is 764 feet long, and the entire structure covers a ground area of more than 13 acres.
The Great Pyramid is the only one in the group at Gizeh – in fact, as far as known, the only one in
Egypt – that has chambers within the actual body of the Pyramid itself. Far this reason it is said to refute