188The Life and Philosophy
of Pythagoras
WhilE MNESARCHUS, THE FATHER OF PYTHAGORAS, was in the city
of Delphi on matters pertaining to his business as a merchant, he and his
wife, Parthenis, decided to consult the oracle of Delphi as to whether the
Fates were favorable for their return voyage to Syria. When the Pythoness (prophet-ess of apollo) seated herself on the golden tripod over the yawning vent of the oracle,
she did not answer the question they had asked, but told Mnesarchus that his wife was then with child and would give birth to a son who was destined to surpass all men in beauty and wisdom, and who throughout the course of his life would contribute much to the benefit of mankind. Mnesarchus was so deeply impressed by the prophecy that he changed his wife’s name to Pythasis, in honor of the Pythian priestess. When the child was born at sidon in Phœnicia, it was – as the oracle had said – a son. mnesarchus and Pythasis named the child Pythagoras, for they believed that he had been predestined by the oracle.
many strange legends have been preserved concerning the birth of Pythagoras. some
maintained that he was no mortal man: that he was one of the gods who had taken a hu-man body to enable him to come into the world and instruct the human race. Pythagoras was one of the many sages and saviors of antiquity for whom an immaculate conception is asserted. in his Anacalypsis , Godfrey higgins writes:
“The first striking circumstance in which the history of Pythagoras agrees
with the history of Jesus is, that they were natives of nearly the same country; the former being born at sidon, the latter at bethlehem, both in syria. the father
of Pythagoras, as well as the father of Jesus, was prophetically informed that his wife should bring forth a son, who should be a benefactor to mankind. they were
both born when their mothers were from home on journeys, Joseph and his wife having gone up to bethlehem to be taxed, and the father of Pythagoras having
travelled from samos, his residence, to sidon, about his mercantile concerns. Pythais [Pythasis], the mother of Pythagoras, had a connexion with an Apolloniacal spectre, or ghost, of the God Apollo, or God Sol, (of course this must have been a holy ghost, and here we have the holy Ghost) which afterward appeared to her
husband, and told him that he must have no connexion with his wife during her pregnancy – a story evidently the same as that relating to Joseph and Mary. From these peculiar circumstances, Pythagoras was known by the same title as Jesus, namely, the son of God; and was supposed by the multitude to be under the influence of Divine inspiration.”

189This most famous philosopher was born sometime between 600 and 590 B.C., and the
length of his life has been estimated at nearly one hundred years.
the teachings of Pythagoras indicate that he was thoroughly conversant with the precepts of Oriental and Occidental esotericism. He traveled among the Jews and was instructed by the rabbins concerning the secret traditions of moses, the lawgiver of israel.
Later the School of the Essenes was conducted chiefly for the purpose of interpreting the Pythagorean symbols. Pythagoras was initiated into the Egyptian, babylonian, and
Chaldean mysteries. although it is believed by some that he was a disciple of Zoroaster,
it is doubtful whether his instructor of that name was the God-man now revered by the Parsees. While accounts of his travels differ, historians agree that he visited many coun-tries and studied at the feet of many masters.
“After having acquired all which it was possible for him to learn of the Greek
philosophers and, presumably, become an initiate in the Eleusinian mysteries, he went to Egypt, and after many rebuffs and refusals, finally succeeded in securing initiation in the mysteries of isis, at the hands of the priests of thebes. then this
intrepid ‘joiner’ wended his way into Phoenicia and syria where the mysteries of
adonis were conferred upon him, and crossing to the valley of the Euphrates he tarried long enough to become versed in, the secret lore of the Chaldeans, who still dwelt in the vicinity of Babylon. Finally, he made his greatest and most historic venture through media and Persia into hindustan where he remained several years
as a pupil and initiate of the learned Brahmins of Elephanta and Ellora.” (See Ancient Freemasonry, by Frank C. Higgins, 32°.)
the same author adds that the name of Pythagoras is still preserved in the records of
the brahmins as Yavancharya, the ionian teacher.
Pythagoras was said to have been the first man to call himself a philosopher; in fact,
the world is indebted to him for the word philosopher. before that time the wise men had
called themselves sages, which was interpreted to mean those who know. Pythagoras was
more modest. he coined the word philosopher, which he defined as one who is attempting
to find out.
after returning from his wanderings, Pythagoras established a school, or as it has been
sometimes called, a university, at Crotona, a Dorian colony in southern italy. upon his
arrival at Crotona he was regarded askance, but after a short time those holding important positions in the surrounding colonies sought his counsel in matters of great moment. he
gathered around him a small group of sincere disciples whom he instructed in the secret wisdom which had been revealed to him, and also in the fundamentals of occult math-ematics, music, and astronomy, which he considered to be the triangular foundation of all the arts and sciences.
When he was about sixty years old, Pythagoras married one of his disciples, and seven
children resulted from the union. his wife was a remarkably able woman, who not only
inspired him during the years of his life but after his assassination continued to promul-gate his doctrines.

190as is so often the case with genius, Pythagoras by his outspokenness incurred both
political and personal enmity. among those who came for initiation was one who, because
Pythagoras refused to admit him, determined to destroy both the man and his philosophy.
by means of false propaganda, this disgruntled one turned the minds of the common people against the philosopher. Without warning, a band of murderers descended upon the little group of buildings where the great teacher and his disciples dwelt, burned the structures and killed Pythagoras.
accounts of the philosopher’s death do not agree. some say that he was murdered
with his disciples; others that, on escaping from Crotona with a small band of follow-ers, he was trapped and burned alive by his enemies in a little house where the band had decided to rest for the night. Another account states that, finding themselves trapped in the burning structure, the disciples threw themselves into the flames, making of their own bodies a bridge over which Pythagoras escaped, only to die of a broken heart a short time afterwards as the result of grieving over the apparent fruitlessness of his efforts to serve and illuminate mankind.
PYTHAGORAS,THE FIRST PHILOSOPHER.From Historia Deorum Fatidicorum.
During his youth, Pythagoras was
a disciple of Pherecydes and her -
modamas, and while in his teens became renowned for the clarity of his philosophic concepts. in height
he exceeded six feet; his body was as perfectly formed as that of apollo. Pythagoras was the person-ification of majesty and power, and in his presence a felt humble and afraid. as he grew older, his physical power increased rather than waned, so that as he approached the century mark he was actually in the prime of life. The influence of this great soul over those about him was such that a word of praise from Pythagoras filled his disciples with ecstasy, while one committed suicide because the master became
momentarily irritate over some-thing he had dome. Pythagoras was so impressed by this tragedy that he never again spoke unkindly to or about anyone.
his surviving disciples attempted to perpetuate his doctrines, but they were persecuted
on every hand and very little remains today as a testimonial to the greatness of this phi-

191losopher. it is said that the disciples of Pythagoras never addressed him or referred to him
by his own name, but always as The Master or That Man. This may have been because of
the fact that the name Pythagoras was believed to consist of a certain number of specially
arranged letters with great sacred significance. The Word magazine has printed an article by t. r. Prater, showing that Pythagoras initiated his candidates by means of a certain
formula concealed within the letters of his own name. this may explain why the word
Pythagoras was so highly revered.
after the death of Pythagoras his school gradually disintegrated, but those who had
benefited by its teachings revered the memory of the great philosopher, as during his life they had reverenced the man himself. as time went on, Pythagoras came to be regarded as
a god rather than a man, and his scattered disciples were bound together by their common admiration for the transcendent genius of their teacher. Edouard schure, in his Pythagoras
and the Delphic Mysteries, relates the following incident as illustrative of the bond of fel-lowship uniting the members of the Pythagorean school:
“one of them who had fallen upon sickness and poverty was kindly taken in by an innkeeper. Before dying he traced a few mysterious signs (the pentagram, no doubt) on the door of the inn and said to the host, ‘Do not be uneasy, one of my brothers will pay my debts.’ a
year afterwards, as a stranger was passing by this inn he saw the signs and said to the host, ‘ i
am a Pythagorean; one of my brothers died here; tell me what i owe you on his account.’”
Frank C. Higgins, 32°, gives an excellent compendium of the Pythagorean tenets in
the following outline:
“Pythagoras’ teachings are of the most transcendental importance to masons,
inasmuch as they are the necessary fruit of his contact with the leading philoso-phers of the whole civilized world of his own day, and must represent that in which all were agreed, shorn of all weeds of controversy. thus, the determined
stand made by Pythagoras, in defense of pure monotheism, is sufficient evidence that the tradition to the effect that the unity of God was the supreme secret of all the ancient initiations is substantially correct. the philosophical school of Pythagoras was, in a measure, also a series of initiations, for he caused his pupils to pass through a series of degrees and never permitted them personal contact with himself until they had reached the higher grades. according to his biographers,
his degrees were three in number. The first, that of ‘Mathematicus,’ assuring his pupils proficiency in mathematics and geometry, which was then, as it would be now if masonry were properly inculcated, the basis upon which all other
knowledge was erected. secondly, the degree of ‘ theoreticus,’ which dealt with
superficial applications of the exact sciences, and, lastly, the degree of ‘Electus,’ which entitled the candidate to pass forward into the light of the fullest illumina-tion which he was capable of absorbing. the pupils of the Pythagorean school
were divided into ‘exoterici,’ or pupils in the outer grades, and ‘esoterici,’ after they had passed the third degree of initiation and were entitled to the secret wis-dom. silence, secrecy and unconditional obedience were cardinal principles of
this great order.” (See Ancient Freemasonry.)