346The Qabbalah, the Secret
Doctrine of Israel
ALBERT PIKE, quoting from Transcendental Magic , thus sums up the importance of Qabbalism as a key to masonic esotericism:
“One is filled with admiration, on penetrating into the Sanctuary of the Kabalah,
at seeing a doctrine so logical, so simple, and at the same time so absolute. the necessary union of ideas and signs, the consecration of the most fundamental realities
by the primitive characters; the trinity of Words, letters, and numbers; a philosophy
simple as the alphabet, profound and infinite as the Word; theorems more complete and luminous than those of Pythagoras; a theology summed up by counting on one’s fingers; an Infinite which can be held in the hollow of an infant’s hand; ten ciphers and twenty-two letters, a triangle, a square, and a circle, – these are all the elements of the Kabalah. These are the elementary principles of the written Word, reflection of that spoken Word that created the world!” (Morals and Dogma.)
Hebrew theology was divided into three distinct parts. The first was the law, the second was the soul of the law, and the third was the soul of the soul of the law. the law was
taught to all the children of israel; the Mishna, or the soul of the law, was revealed to the
rabbins and teachers; but the Qabbalah, the soul of the soul of the law, was cunningly
concealed, and only the highest initiates among the Jews were instructed in its secret principles.
According to certain Jewish mystics, Moses ascended Mount Sinai three times, remaining in the presence of God forty days each time. During the first forty days the tables of the written law were delivered to the prophet; during the second forty days he received the soul of the law; and during the last forty days God instructed him in the mysteries of the Qabbalah, the soul of the soul of the law. Moses concealed in the first four books of the Pentateuch the secret instructions that God had given him, and for centuries students of Qabbalism. have sought therein the secret doctrine of israel. as the spiritual nature of man
is concealed in his physical body, so the unwritten law – the Mishna and the Qabbalah – is
concealed within the written teachings of the mosaic code. Qabbalah means the secret or
hidden tradition, the unwritten law, and according to an early rabbi, it was delivered to
man in order that through the aid of its abstruse principles he might learn to understand the mystery of both the universe about him and the universe within him.
the origin of Qabbalism is a legitimate subject for controversy. Early initiates of
the Qabbalistic Mysteries believed that its principles were first taught by God to a school of his angels before the fall of man. the angels later communicated the secrets

347to adam, so that through the knowledge gained from an understanding of its principles fallen humanity might regain its lost a estate. The Angel Raziel was dispatched
from heaven to instruct adam in the mysteries of the Qabbalah. Different angels were
employed to initiate the succeeding patriarchs in this difficult science. Tophiel was the teacher of shem, raphael of isaac, metatron of moses, and michael of David.
(See Faiths of the World.)
Christian D. Ginsburg has written:
“From Adam it passed over to Noah, and then to Abraham, the friend of God, who
emigrated with it to Egypt, where the patriarch allowed a portion of this mysterious doctrine to ooze out. It was in this way that the Egyptians obtained some knowledge of it, and the other Eastern nations could introduce it into their philosophical sys-tems. Moses, who was learned in all the wisdom of Egypt, was first initiated into it in the land of his birth, but became most proficient in it during his wanderings in the wilderness, when he not only devoted to it the leisure hours of the whole forty years, but received lessons in it from one of the angels. (...) Moses also initiated the seventy Elders into the secrets of this doctrine and they again transmitted them from hand to hand. of all who formed the unbroken line of tradition, David and solomon were
most initiated into the Kabbalah.” (See The Kabbalah.)
according to Eliphas levi, the three greatest books of Qabbalism are the Sepher
Yetzirah, The Book of Formation; the Sepher ha Zohar, the book of splendor; and the
Apocalypse , the book of revelation. the dates of the writing of these books are by no
means thoroughly established. Qabbalists declare that the Sepher Yetzirah was written by
abraham. although it is by far the oldest of the Qabbalistic books, it was probably from
the pen of the Rabbi Akiba, A.D. 120.
the Sepher ha Zohar presumably was written by Simeon ben Jochai, a disciple of Akiba.
Rabbi Simeon was sentenced to death about A.D. 161 by Lucius Verus, co-regent of the Em-peror marc aurelius antoninus. he escaped with his son and, hiding in a cave, transcribed
the manuscript of the Zohar with the assistance of Elias, who appeared to them at inter -
vals. simeon was twelve years in the cave, during which time he evolved the complicated
symbolism of the “Greater Face” and the “Lesser Face.” While discoursing with disciples rabbi simeon expired, and the “lamp of israel” was extinguished. his death and burial
were accompanied by many supernatural phenomena. the legend goes on to relate that the
secret doctrines of Qabbalism had been in existence since the beginning of the world, but that Rabbi Simeon was the first man permitted to reduce them to writing. Twelve hundred years later the books which he had compiled were discovered and published for the benefit of humanity by moses de león. the probability is that moses de león himself compiled the
Zohar about A.D. 1305, drawing his material from the unwritten secrets of earlier Jewish mystics. the Apocalypse, accredited to St. John the Divine, is also of uncertain date, and the
identity of its author has never been satisfactorily proved.
because of its brevity and because it is the key to Qabbalistic thought, the Sepher
Yetzirah is reproduced in full in this chapter. so far as is known, the Sepher ha Zohar has

348never been completely translated into English, but it can be obtained in French. (S. L.
macGregor-mathers translated three books of the Zohar into English.) the Zohar contains a vast number of philosophical tenets, and a paraphrase of its salient points is em-bodied in this work.
THE SEVENTY-TWO NAMES OF GOD.
From Kircher’s Œdipus Ægyptiacus .
this rare cut shows the name of God in seventy-two languages inscribed upon the petals of a symbolic
sunflower. Above the circle are the seventy-two powers of God according to the Hebrew Qabbalah. Below two trees, that on the left bearing the symbols of the planets and that on the right the signs of the zodiac and the names of the tribes of israel. the esoteric doctrines of the Qabbalah are in alignment with the secret
teachings of all the schools of philosophy, but the method by which its secrets are revealed to the wise and concealed from the ignorant is most unusual. as the religious world interprets its scriptures with twentiethcentury educational facilities, it becomes ever more apparent that the sacred books were not historical documents, but that the kings, sages, prophets, and saviors whom bible students ham revered for ages as
once-existing personalities are in reality only personified attributes of man himself.

349Few realize the influence exerted by Qabbalism over mediæval thought, both Christian and Jewish. It taught that there existed within the sacred writings a hidden doctrine
which was the key to those writings. This is symbolized by the crossed keys upon the papal crest. scores of learned minds began to search for those arcane truths by which the
race should be redeemed; and that their labor was not without its reward, their subsequent writings have demonstrated.
the theories of Qabbalism are inextricably interwoven with the tenets of alchemy,
Hermeticism, Rosicrucianism, and Freemasonry. The words Qabbalism and Hermeticism
are now considered as synonymous terms covering all the arcana and esotericism of an-tiquity. The simple Qabbalism of the first centuries of the Christian Era gradually evolved into an elaborate theological system, which became so involved that it was next to impos-sible to comprehend its dogma.
The Qabbalists divided the uses of their sacred science into five sections. The Natural
Qabbalah was used solely to assist the investigator in his study of nature’s mysteries. the
Analogical Qabbalah was formulated to exhibit the relationship which exists between all things in nature, and it revealed to the wise that all creatures and substances were one
in essence, and that man – the little universe – was a replica in miniature of God – the
Great universe. the Contemplative Qabbalah was evolved for the purpose of revealing
through the higher intellectual faculties the mysteries of the celestial spheres. by its aid
the abstract reasoning faculties cognized the measureless planes of infinity and learned to know the creatures existing within them. the Astrological Qabbalah instructed those
who studied its lore in the power, magnitude, and actual substance of the sidereal bod-ies, and also revealed the mystical constitution of the planet itself. The fifth, or Magical
Qabbalah, was studied by such as desired to gain control over the demons and subhuman intelligences of the invisible worlds. it was also highly valued as a method of healing the
sick by talismans, amulets, charms, and invocations.
the Sepher Yetzirah, according to Adolph Franck, differs from other sacred books in
that it does not explain the world and the phenomena of which it is the stage by leaning on the idea of God or by setting itself up as the interpreter of the supreme will. this ancient
work rather reveals God by estimating his manifold handiwork. in preparing the Sepher
Yetzirah for the consideration of the reader, five separate English translations have been compared. the resulting form, while it embodies the salient features of each, is not a direct translation from any one hebrew or latin text. although the purpose was to convey
the spirit rather than the letter of the ancient document, there are no wide deviations from the original rendition. So far as known, the first translation of the Sepher Yetzirah into
English was made by the Rev. Dr. Isidor Kalisch, in 1877. (See Arthur Edward Waite.) In this translation the Hebrew text accompanies the English words. The work of Dr. Kalisch has been used as the foundation of the following interpretation, but material from other authorities has been incorporated and many passages have been rewritten to simplify the general theme.
at hand also was a manuscript copy in English of the Book of the Cabalistick Art, by
Doctor John Pistor. The document is undated; but judging from the general type of the writing, the copy was made during the eighteenth century. the third volume used as a