The Fraternity
of the Rose Cross
Who WErE thE rosiCruCians? Were they an organization of profound
thinkers rebelling against the inquisitional religious and philosophical limita -
tions of their time or were they isolated transcendentalists united only by the
similarity of their viewpoints and deductions? Where was the “house of the holy spirit,
“ in which, according to their manifestoes, they met once a year to plan the future activities of their Order? Who was the mysterious person referred to as “Our Illustrious Father and brother C.r.C.”? Did those three letters actually stand for the words “Christian rosie
Cross”? Was Christian Rosencreutz, the supposed author of the Chymical Nuptials, the
same person who with three others founded “the society of the rose Cross”?
What relationship existed between Rosicrucianism and mediæval Freemasonry? Why
were the destinies of these two organizations so closely interwoven? Is the “Brotherhood of the Rose Cross” the much-sought-after link connecting the Freemasonry of the Middle Ages with the symbolism and mysticism of antiquity, and are its secrets being perpetuated by modern masonry? Did the original rosicrucian order disintegrate in the latter part of
the eighteenth century, or does the Society still exist as an organization, maintaining the same secrecy for which it was originally famous? What was the true purpose for which the “brotherhood of the rose Cross” was formed? Were the rosicrucians a religious and
philosophic brotherhood, as they claimed to be, or were their avowed tenets a blind to conceal the true object of the Fraternity, which possibly was the political control of Eu-rope? these are some of the problems involved in the study of rosicrucianism.
there are four distinct theories regarding the rosicrucian enigma. Each is the result of
a careful consideration of the evidence by scholars who have spent their lives ransacking the archives of Hermetic lore. The conclusions reached demonstrate clearly the inadequa -
cy of the records available concerning the genesis and early activities of the “brethren of the rose Cross.”
THE FIRST POSTULATE
it is assumed that the rosicrucian order existed historically in accordance with the description of its foundation and subsequent activities published in its manifesto, the Fama
Fraternitatis , which is believed to have been written in the year 1610, but apparently did
not appear in print until 1614, although an earlier edition is suspected by some authorities. Intelligent consideration of the origin of Rosicrucianism requires a familiarity with the contents of the first and most important of its documents. The Fama Fraternitatis begins
with a reminder to all the world of God’s goodness and mercy, and it warns the intelli-

423gentsia that their egotism and covetousness cause them to follow after false prophets and
to ignore the true knowledge which God in his goodness has revealed to them. hence, a
reformation is necessary, and God has raised up philosophers and sages for this purpose.
in order to assist in bringing about the reformation, a mysterious person called “the
Highly Illuminated Father C.R.C.,” a German by birth, descended of a noble family, but himself a poor man, instituted the “secret society of the rose Cross.” C.r.C. was placed
in a cloister when only five years of age, but later becoming dissatisfied with its educa -
tional system, he associated himself with a brother of holy orders who was setting forth
on a pilgrimage to the holy land. they started out together, but the brother died at Cyprus
and C.R.C! continued alone to Damascus. Poor health prevented him from reaching Jeru-salem, so he remained at Damascus, studying with the philosophers who dwelt there.
While pursuing his studies, he heard of a group of mystics and Qabbalists abiding in
the mystic Arabian city of Damcar. Giving up his desire to visit Jerusalem, he arranged with the arabians for his transportation to Damcar. C.r.C. was but sixteen years of age
when he arrived at Damcar. he was received as one who had been long expected, a comrade and a friend in philosophy, and was instructed in the secrets of the arabian adepts.
While there, C.r.C. learned the arabic tongue and translated the sacred book M into
latin; and upon returning to Europe he brought this important volume with him.
After studying three years in Damcar, C.R.C. departed for the city of Fez, where the
Arabian magicians declared further information would be given him. At Fez he was in-structed how to communicate with the Elementary inhabitants [probably the Nature spir -
its], and these disclosed to him many other great secrets of Nature. While the philosophers in Fez were not so great as those in Damcar, the previous experiences of C.R.C. enabled him to distinguish the true from the false and thus add greatly to his store of knowledge.
After two years in Fez, C.R.C. sailed for Spain, carrying with him many treasures,
among them rare plants and animals accumulated during his wanderings. he fondly hoped
that the learned men of Europe would receive with gratitude the rare intellectual and material treasures which he had brought for their consideration. instead he encountered
only ridicule, for the so-called wise were afraid to admit their previous ignorance lest their prestige be impaired. at this point in the narrative is an interpolation stating that
Paracelsus, while not a member of the “Fraternity of the Rose Cross,” had read the book M and from a consideration of its contents had secured information which made him the foremost physician of mediæval Europe.
tired, but not discouraged, as the result of the fruitlessness of his efforts, C.r.C. returned to Germany, where he built a house in which he could quietly carry on his study and research. He also manufactured a number of rare scientific instruments for research purposes. While he could have made himself famous had he cared to commercialize his knowledge, he preferred the companionship of God to the esteem of men.
After five years of retirement he decided to renew his struggle for a reformation of the
arts and sciences of his day, this time with the aid of a few trusted friends. he sent to the
cloister where his early training had been received and called to himself three brethren, whom he bound by an oath to preserve inviolate the secrets he should impart and to write down for the sake of posterity the information he should dictate. these four founded the

424“Fraternity of the Rose Cross.” They prepared its secret cipher language and, according to
the Fama, a great dictionary in which all forms of wisdom were classified to the glorification
of God. they also began the work of transcribing the book M, but found the task too difficult
because of the demands of the great numbers of sick who came to them for healing.
THE GOLDEN AND ROSY CROSS.
From Geheime Figuren der Rosenkreuzer.
it is said of this cross that it is made of spiritual gold and that each brother wears it upon his breast. it
bears the alchemical symbols of salt, sulphur, and mercury; also a star of the planets; and around it are the four words FAITH, HOPE, LOVE, and PATIENCE. The double-headed eagle, or Phœnix, subtly foreshad-ows the ultimate androgynous state of the human creature. rosicrucian alchemy was not concerned with

425metals alone. man’s own body was the alchemical laboratory, and none could reach rosicrucian adeptship
until he had performed the supreme experiment of transmutation by changing the base metals of ignorance
into the pure gold of wisdom and understanding.
having completed a newer and larger building, which they called the “ house of the
Holy Spirit,” they decided to include four new members in the Fraternity, thus increasing the number to eight, seven of whom were German. all were unmarried. Working industriously
together, they speedily completed the arduous labor of preparing the documents, instruc-tions, and arcana of the order. they also put the house called “sancti spiritus” in order.
they then decided to separate and visit the other countries of the earth, not only that
their wisdom might be given to others who deserved it but also that they might check and correct any mistakes existing in their own system. before separating, the brethren prepared six rules, or by-laws, and each bound himself to obey them. The first rule was that they should take to themselves no other dignity or credit than that they were willing to heal the sick without charge. the second was that from that time on forever they should
wear no special robe or garment, but should dress according to the custom of the country wherein they dwelt. the third stated that every year upon a certain day they should meet in
the “house of the holy spirit,” or, if unable to do so, should be represented by an epistle.
the fourth decreed that each member should search for a worthy person to succeed him at his own demise. The fifth stated that the letters “R.C.” should be their seal, mark, and character from that time onward. The sixth specified that the Fraternity should remain unknown to the world for a period of one hundred years.
After they had sworn to this code five of the Brothers departed to distant lands, and a
year later two of the others also went their way, leaving Father C.R. C. alone in the “House of the Holy Spirit.” Year after year they met with great joy, for they had quietly and sin-cerely promulgated their doctrines among the wise of the earth.
When the first of the Order died in England, it was decided that the burial places of
the members should be secret. Soon afterward Father C.R.C. called the remaining six to-gether, and it is supposed that then he prepared his own symbolic tomb. The Fama records that none of the Brothers alive at the time of its writing knew when Father C.R.C. died or where he was buried. His body was accidentally discovered 120 years after his death when one of the brothers, who possessed considerable architectural skill, decided to make
some alterations in the “House of the Holy Spirit.” [It is only suspected that the tomb was in this building.]
While making his alterations, the brother discovered a memorial tablet upon which were
inscribed the names of the early members of the order. this he decided to transfer to a more
imposing chapel, for at that time no one knew in what country Father C.R.C. had died, this information having been concealed by the original members. in attempting to remove the
memorial tablet, which was held in place by a large nail, some stones and plastering were broken from the wall, disclosing a door concealed in the masonry. the members of the order immediately cleared away the rest of the débris and uncovered the entrance to a vault. upon the door in large letters were the words: Post CXX annos P atEbo. this, according to the mystic interpretation of the Brethren, meant, “In 120 years I shall come forth.”