Rosicrucian Doctrines
and Tenets
TrustWorthY INFORMATION is unavailable concerning the actual philosophical beliefs, political aspirations, and humanitarian activities of the rosicrucian Fraternity. Today, as of old, the mysteries of the Society are preserved
inviolate by virtue of their essential nature; and attempts to interpret rosicrucian philosophy are but speculations, anything to the contrary notwithstanding.
Evidence points to the probable existence of two distinct rosicrucian bodies: an inner
organization whose members never revealed their identity or teachings to the world, and an
outer body under the supervision of the inner group. in all probability, the symbolic tomb of
Christian Rosencreutz, Knight of the Golden Stone, was in reality this outer body, the spirit of which is in a more exalted sphere. For a period of more than a century subsequent to 1614, the outer body circulated tracts and manifestoes under either its own name or the names of various initiated members. the purpose of these writings was apparently to confuse and
mislead investigators, and thus effectively to conceal the actual designs of the Fraternity.
When rosicrucianism became the philosophical “fad” of the seventeenth century, numer -
ous documents on the subject were also circulated for purely commercial purposes by impos-tors desirous of capitalizing its popularity. The cunningly contrived artifices of the Fraternity itself and the blundering literary impostures of charlatans formed a double veil behind which the inner organization carried on its activities in a manner totally dissimilar to its purposes and principles as publicly disseminated. The Fratres Rosa Crucis naively refer to the misunder -
standings which they have for obvious reasons permitted to exist concerning themselves as being “clouds” within which they labor and behind which they are concealed.
an inkling of the substance of rosicrucianism – its esoteric doctrines – can be gleaned
from an analysis of its shadow – its exoteric writings. in one of the most important of their
“clouds,” the Confessio Fraternitatis, the Brethren of the Fraternity of R.C. seek to justify
their existence and explain (?) the purposes and activities of their Order. In its original form the Confessio is divided into fourteen chapters, which are here epitomized.
CONFESSIO FRATERNITATIS R. C. AD
ERUDITOS EUROPÆ
Chapter I. Do not through hasty judgment or prejudice misinterpret the statements
concerning our Fraternity published in our previous manifesto – the Fama Fraternitatis. Jehovah, beholding the decadence of civilization, seeks to redeem humanity by revealing to the willing and by thrusting upon the reluctant those secrets which previ-ously he had reserved for his elect. by this wisdom the godly shall be saved, but the

437sorrows of the ungodly shall be multiplied. While the true purpose of our order was set
forth in the Fama Fraternitatis, misunderstandings have arisen through which we have
been falsely accused of heresy and treason. in this document we hope so to clarify our position that the learned of Europe will be moved to join with us in the dissemination of divine knowledge according to the will of our illustrious founder.
Chapter II. While it is alleged by many that the philosophic cide (
sic. JBH ) of our
day is sound, we declare it to be false and soon to die of its own inherent weakness. just as nature, however, provides a remedy for each new disease that manifests itself,
so our Fraternity has provided a remedy for the infirmities of the world’s philosophic system. the secret philosophy of the r.C. is founded upon that knowledge which is
the sum and head of all faculties, sciences, and arts. by our divinely revealed system
– which partakes much of theology and medicine but little of jurisprudence – we analyze the heavens and the earth; but mostly we study man himself, within whose nature is concealed the supreme secret. if the learned of out day will accept our invitation and join themselves to our Fraternity, we will reveal to them undreamed-of secrets and wonders concerning the hidden workings of nature.
Chapter III. Do not believe that the secrets discussed in this brief document are
lightly esteemed by us. We cannot describe fully the marvels of our Fraternity lest the uninformed be overwhelmed by our astonishing declarations and the vulgar ridicule the mysteries which they do not comprehend. We also fear that many will be con-fused by the unexpected generosity of our proclamation, for not understanding the wonders of this sixth age they do nor realize the great changes which are to come. like blind men living in a world full of light, they discern only through the sense of
feeling. [By sight is implied spiritual cognition: by feeling, the material senses.]
Chapter IV . We firmly believe that through deep meditation on the inventions
of the human mind and the mysteries of life, through the cooperation of the an-gels and spirits, and through experience and long observation, our loving Christian Father C.R.C. was so fully illumined with God’s wisdom that were all the books and writings of the world lost and the foundations of science overturned, the Fra-ternity of r.C. could reestablish the structure of world thought upon the foundation of divine truth and integrity. because of the great depth and perfection of our
knowledge, those desiring to understand the mysteries of the Fraternity of R. C. cannot attain to that wisdom immediately, but must grow in understanding and knowledge. Therefore, our Fraternity is divided into grades through which each must ascend step by step to the Great arcanum. now that it has pleased God to
lighten unto us his sixth candelabrum, is it not better to seek truth in this way than
to wander through the labyrinths of worldly ignorance?
Furthermore, those who receive this knowledge shall become masters of
all arts and crafts; no secret shall be hidden from them; and all good works of the past, present, and future shall be accessible to them. the whole world shall
become as one book and the contradictions of science and theology shall be reconciled. rejoice, o humanity! for the time has come when God has decreed
that the number of our Fraternity shall be increased, a labor that we have joy-

438ously undertaken. the doors of wisdom are now open to the world, but only to
those who have earned the privilege may the brothers present themselves, for
it is forbidden to reveal our knowledge even to our own children. the right to
receive spiritual truth cannot be inherited: it must be evolved within the soul
of man himself.
Chapter V . though we may be accused of indiscretion in offering our treasures
so freely and promiscuously – without discriminating between the godly, the wise, the prince, the peasant – we affirm that we have not betrayed our trust; for although we have published our Fama in five languages, only those understand it who have
that right. our society is not to be discovered by curiosity seekers, but only by
serious and consecrated thinkers; nevertheless we have circulated our Fama in
five mother tongues so that the righteous of all nations may have an opportunity to know of us, even though they be not scholars. a thousand times the unworthy may
present themselves and clamor at the gates, but God has forbidden us of the Frater -
nity of r.C. to hear their voices, and he has surrounded us with his clouds and his
protection so that no harm may come to us, and God has decreed that we of the order of r.C. can no longer be seen by mortal eyes unless they have received strength
borrowed from the eagle. We further affirm that we shall reform the governments of Europe and pattern them according to the system applied by the philosophers of Damcar. all men desirous of securing knowledge shall receive as much as they are
capable of understanding. the rule of false theology shall be overthrown and God
shall make his will known through his chosen philosophers.
Chapter VII. Because of the need of brevity, it is enough to say that our Father C.R.C. was born in the year 1378 and departed at the age of 106, leaving to us the labor of spreading die doctrine of philosophic religion to the entire world. Our Fraternity is open to all who sincerely seek for truth; but we publicly warn the false and impious that they cannot betray or injure us, for God has protected our Fraternity, and all who seek to do it harm shall have their evil designs return and destroy them, while the treasures of our Fraternity shall remain untouched, to be used by the lion in the establishment of his kingdom.
Chapter VII. We declare that God, before the end of the world, shall create a
great flood of spiritual light to alleviate the sufferings of humankind. Falsehood and darkness which have crept into the arts, sciences, religions, and governments of humanity – making it difficult for even the wise to discover the path of real -
ity – shall be forever removed and a single standard established, so that all may enjoy the fruitage of truth. We shall not be recognized as those responsible for this change, for people shall say that it is the result of the progressiveness of the age. Great are the reforms about to take place; but we of the Fraternity of R.C. do not arrogate to ourselves the glory for this divine reformation, since many there are, not members of our Fraternity but honest, true and wise men, who by their intel -
ligence and their writings shall hasten its coming. We testify that sooner the stones shall rise up and offer their services than that there shall be any lack of righteous persons to execute the will of God upon earth.

Chapter VIII. that no one may doubt, we declare that God has sent messengers
and signs in the heavens, namely, the i new stars in Serpentarius and Cygnus, to show
that a great Council of the Elect is to take place. this proves that God reveals in visible nature – for the discerning few – signs and symbols of all things that are coming
to pass. God has given man two eyes, two nostrils, and two ears, but only one tongue. Whereas the eyes, the nostrils, and the ears admit the wisdom of nature into the mind,
the tongue alone may give it forth. in various ages there have been illumined ones who
have seen, smelt, tasted, or heard the will of God, but it will shortly come to pass that those who have seen, smelt, tasted, or heard shall speak, and truth shall be revealed. before this revelation of righteousness is possible, however, the world must sleep away
the intoxication of her poisoned chalice (filled with the false life of the theological vine) and, opening her heart to virtue and understanding, welcome the rising sun of truth.
Chapter IX. We have a magic writing, copied from that divine alphabet with
which God writes his will upon the face of celestial and terrestrial nature. With
this new language we read God’s will for all his creatures, and just as astronomers
predict eclipses so we prognosticate the obscurations of the church and how long they shall last. Our language is like unto that of Adam and Enoch before the Fall, and though we understand and can explain our mysteries in this our sacred language, we cannot do so in latin, a tongue contaminated by the confusion of babylon.
Chapter X. although there are still certain powerful persons who oppose and
hinder us – because of which we must remain concealed – we exhort those who would become of our Fraternity to study unceasingly the Sacred Scriptures, for such as do this cannot be far from us. We do not mean that the bible should be
continually in the mouth of man, but that he should search for its true and eternal meaning, which is seldom discovered by theologians, scientists, or mathematicians because they are blinded by the opinions of their sects. We bear witness that never since the beginning of the world has there been given to man a more excellent book than the holy bible. blessed is he who possesses it, more blessed he who reads it,
most blessed he who understands it, and most godlike he who obeys it.
Chapter XI. We wish the statements we made in the Fama Fraternitatis concerning the transmutation of metals and the universal medicine to be lightly understood. While we realize that both these works are attainable by man, we fear that many real-ly great minds may be led away from the true quest of knowledge and understanding if they permit themselves to limit their investigation to the transmutation of metals. When to a man is given power to heal disease, to overcome poverty, and to reach a position of worldly dignity, that man is beset by numerous temptations and unless he possess true knowledge and full understanding he will become a terrible menace to mankind. the alchemist who attains to the art of transmuting base metals can do
all manner of evil unless his understanding be as great as his self-created wealth. We therefore affirm that man must first gain knowledge, virtue, and understanding; then all other things may be added unto him. We accuse the Christian Church of the great sin of possessing power and using it unwisely; therefore we prophesy that it shall fall by the weight of its own iniquities and its crown shall be brought to naught.