372The Tree of the Sephiroth
ThE TREE OF THE SEPHIROTH may be considered an invaluable compendium
of the secret philosophy which originally was the spirit and soul of Chasidism.
the Qabbalah is the priceless heritage of israel, but each year those who comprehend its true principles become fewer in number. The Jew of today, if he lacks a realization of the profundity of his people’s doctrines, is usually permeated with that most dangerous form of ignorance, modernism, and is prone to regard the Qabbalah either as an evil to be shunned like the plague or as a ridiculous superstition which has survived the black magic of the Dark ages. Yet without the key which the Qabbalah supplies, the spiritual mysteries
of both the Old and the New Testament must remain unsolved by Jew and Gentile alike.
the sephirothic tree consists of ten globes of luminous splendor arranged in three
vertical columns and connected by 22 channels or paths. the ten globes are called the Sephiroth and to them are assigned the numbers i to 10. The three columns are called Mercy
(on the right), Severity (on the left), and, between them, Mildness, as the reconciling
power. the columns may also be said to represent Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty , which
form the triune support of the universe, for it is written that the foundation of all things is the Three. the 22 channels are the letters of the hebrew alphabet and to them are assigned
the major trumps of the tarot deck of symbolic cards.
Eliphas Levi declared that by arranging the Tarot cards according to a definite order
man could discover all that is knowable concerning his God, his universe, and himself. When the ten numbers which pertain to the globes (Sephiroth) are combined with the 22 letters relating to the channels, the resultant sum is 32 – the number peculiar to the Qabbalistic Paths of Wisdom. These Paths, occasionally referred to as the 32 teeth in the mouth of the Vast Countenance or as the 32 nerves that branch out from the Divine Brain,
are analogous to the first 32 degrees of Freemasonry, which elevate the candidate to the dignity of a Prince of the Royal Secret. Qabbalists also consider it extremely significant that in the original Hebrew Scriptures the name of God should occur 32 times in the first chapter of Genesis. (In the English translations of the Bible the name appears 33 times.) In the mystic analysis of the human body, according to the Rabbins, 32 spinal segments lead upward to the temple of Wisdom – the skull.
the four Qabbalistic trees described in the preceding chapter were combined by later
Jewish scholars into one all-inclusive diagram and termed by them not only the Sephi-rothic but also the Archetypal, or Heavenly , Adam. according to some authorities, it is
this heavenly adam, and not a terrestrial man, whose creation is described in the opening
chapters of Genesis. out of the substances of this divine man the universe was formed; in
him it remains and will continue even after dissolution shall resolve the spheres back into their own primitive substance. the Deity is never conceived of as actually contained in
the Sephiroth, which are purely hypothetical vessels employed to define the limits of the

373Creative Essence. Adolph Franck rather likens the Sephiroth to varicolored transparent
glass bowls filled with pure light, which apparently assumes the color of its containers but whose essential nature remains ever unchanged and unchangeable.
the ten sephiroth composing the body of the prototypic adam, the numbers related to
them, and the parts of the universe to which they correspond are as follows:
No. THE SEPHIROTH THE UNIVERSE ALTERNATIVE
1 Kether – the Crown Primum mobile The Fiery Heavens
2 Chochmah – Wisdom the Zodiac The First Motion
3 Binah – understanding saturn the Zodiac
4 Chesed – mercy Jupiter saturn
5 Geburah – severity mars Jupiter
6 Tiphereth – beauty sun mars
7 Netsah – victory venus sun
8 Hod – Glory mercury venus
9 Jesod – the Foundation moon mercury
10 Malchuth – the Kingdom Elements moon
It must continually be emphasized that the Sephiroth and the properties assigned
to them, like the tetractys of the Pythagoreans, are merely symbols of the cosmic
system with its multitude of parts. the truer and fuller meaning of these emblems
may not be revealed by writing or by word of mouth, but must be divined as the result of study and meditation. in the Sepher ha Zohar it is written that there is a
garment – the written doctrine-which every man may see. those with understanding do not look upon the garment but at the body beneath it – the intellectual and
philosophical code. The wisest of all, however, the servants of the Heavenly King, look at nothing save the soul – the spiritual doctrine – which is the eternal and ever-springing root of the law. of this great truth Eliphas levi also writes declaring that
none can gain entrance to the secret house of Wisdom unless he wear the voluminous cape of apollonius of tyana and carry in his hand the lamp of hermes. the
cape signifies the qualities of self-possession and self-reliance which must envelope the seeker as a cloak of strength, while the ever-burning lamp of the sage represents the illumined mind and perfectly balanced intellect without which the mystery of the ages can never be solved.

374The Sephirothic Tree is sometimes depicted as a human body, thus more definitely
establishing the true identity of the first, or Heavenly, Man – Adam Kadmon – the Idea of
the Universe. The ten divine globes (Sephiroth) are then considered as analogous to the
ten sacred members and organs of the Protogonos, according to the following arrangement. Kether is the crown of the Prototypic Head and perhaps refers to the pineal gland; Chochmah and binah are the right and left hemispheres respectively of the Great brain;
Chesed and Geburah (Pechad) are the right and left arms respectively, signifying the ac-tive creative members of the Grand man; tiphereth is the heart, or, according to some, the
entire viscera; netsah and hod are the right and left legs respectively, or the supports of
the world; Jesod is the generative system, or the foundation of form; and Malchuth repre-sents the two feet, or the base of being. Occasionally Jesod is considered as the male and malchuth as the female generative power. the Grand man thus conceived is the gigantic
image of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, with head of gold, arms and chest of silver, body of brass, legs of iron, and feet of clay. The mediæval Qabbalists also assigned one of the Ten Commandments and a tenth part of the Lord’s Prayer in sequential order to each of the ten sephiroth.
Concerning the emanations from Kether which establish themselves as three triads
of Creative Powers – termed in the Sepher ha Zohar three heads each with three faces
– h. P. blavatsky writes:
“This [Kether] was the first Sephiroth, containing in herself the other nine
תוריּפסSephiroth, or intelligences. In their totality and unity they represent the ar -
chetypal man, Adam Kadmon, the πρωτόγονος, who in his individuality or unity is
yet dual, or bisexual, the Greek Didumos, for he is the prototype of all humanity.
Thus we obtain three trinities, each contained in a ‘head.’ In the first head, or face (the three-faced Hindu Trimurti), we find Sephira [Kether], the first androgyne, at
the apex of the upper triangle, emitting Hachama [Chochmah], or Wisdom, a masculine and active potency – also called Jah, – היand Binah, ,הניבor Intelligence,
a female and passive potency, also represented by the name Jehovah .הוהיThese three form the first trinity or ‘face’ of the Sephiroth. This triad emanated Hesed,
,דסהor Mercy, a masculine active potency, also called El, from which emanated
Geburah ,הרובגor justice, also called Eloha, a feminine passive potency; from the union of these two was produced Tiphereth ,תראּפטBeauty, Clemency, the Spiritual
sun, known by the divine name Elohim; and the second triad, ‘face,’ or ‘head,’
was formed. these emanating, in their turn, the masculine potency Netzah, ,הצנ
Firmness, or Jehovah Sabaoth, who issued the feminine passive potency Hod, ,דוהsplendor, or Elohim sabaoth; the two produced Jesod, ,דוסיFoundation, who is
the mighty living one El-Chai, thus yielding the third trinity or ‘head.’ the tenth
sephiroth is rather a duad, and is represented on the diagrams as the lowest circle. it is Malchuth or Kingdom, ,תוכלמand Shekinah, ,הניכשalso called Adonai, and
Cherubim among the angelic hosts. The first ‘Head’ is called the Intellectual world; the second ‘head’ is the sensuous, or the world of Perception, and the third is the
material or Physical world.” (See Isis Unveiled.)

THE FOUR SEPHIROTHIC TREES.
the forty concentric circles shown in the large circular cut in the preceding
chapter are here arranged as four trees, each consisting of ten circles. these
trees disclose the organization of the hierarchies controlling the destinies of
all creation. the trees are the same in each of the four world but the powers
vested in the globes express themselves differently through the substances
of each world, resulting in endless differentiation.
among the later Qabbalists there is also a division of the
Sephirothic Tree into five parts, in which the distribution of the
globes is according to the following order:
(1) Macroprosophus, or the Great Face, is the term applied
to Kether as the first and most exalted of the Sephiroth and in-cludes the nine potencies or Sephiroth issuing from Kether.
(2) Abba, the Great Father, is the term generally applied to
Chochmah – Universal Wisdom – the first emanation of Kether, but, according to ibn Gebirol, Chochmah represents the son, the
Logos or the Word born from the union of Kether and Binah.
(3) Aima, the Great Mother, is the name by which binah, or
the third sephira, is generally known. this is the holy Ghost,
from whose body the generations issue forth. being the third
person of the Creative Triad, it corresponds to Jehovah, the De-miurgus.
(4) Microprosophus, or the Lesser Face , is composed of
the six sephiroth – Chesed, Geburah, tiphereth, netsah, hod,
and Jesod. The Microprosophus is commonly called the Lesser
Adam, or Zauir Anpin, whereas the Macroprosophus, or Superior Adam, is Arikh Anpin. The Lesser Face is properly symbolized by the six-pointed star or interlaced triangles of Zion and also by the six faces of the cube. it represents the directions north, east, south, west, up, and down, and also the first six days of Creation. in his list of the parts of the microprosophus,
MacGregor-Mathers includes Binah as the first and superior part of the Lesser Adam, thus making his constitution septenary. if
microprosophus be considered as sexpartite, then his globes (Sephiroth) are analogous to the six days of Creation, and the tenth globe, malchuth, to the sabbath of rest.
(5) The Bride of Microprosophus is malchuth – the epitome
of the Sephiroth, its quaternary constitution being composed of blendings of the four elements. this is the divine Eve that is
taken out of the side of Microprosophus and combines the potencies of the entire Qabbalistic tree in one sphere, which may
be termed man.