Stones, Metals and Gems
EaCh OF THE FOUR PRIMARY elements as taught by the early philosophers
has its analogue in the quaternary terrestrial constitution of man. The rocks and
earth correspond to the bones and flesh; the water to the various fluids; the air to
the gases; and the fire to the bodily heat. Since the bones are the framework that sustains the corporeal structure, they may be regarded as a fitting emblem of the spirit – that divine foundation which supports the composite fabric of mind, soul, and body. to the initiate,
the skeleton of death holding in bony fingers the reaper’s scythe denotes Saturn (Kronos), the father of the gods, carrying the sickle with which he mutilated ouranos, his own sire.
in the language of the mysteries, the spirits of men are the powdered bones of Saturn.
the latter deity was always worshiped under the symbol of the base or footing, inasmuch as he was considered to be the substructure upholding creation. the myth of saturn has its
historical basis in the fragmentary records preserved by the early Greeks and Phœnicians concerning a king by that name who ruled over the ancient continent of hyperborea. Polaris, hyperborea, and atlantis, because they lie buried beneath the continents and oceans
of the modern world, have frequently been symbolized as rocks supporting upon their broad surfaces new lands, races, and empires. according to the scandinavian mysteries,
the stones and cliffs were formed from the bones of Ymir, the primordial giant of the seething clay, while to the Hellenic mystics the rocks were the bones of the Great Mother, Gæa.
after the deluge sent by the gods to destroy mankind at the close of the iron age,
only Deucalion and Pyrrha were left alive. Entering a ruined sanctuary to pray, they were directed by an oracle to depart from the temple and with heads veiled and garments un-bound cast behind them the bones of their mother. Construing the cryptic message of the god to mean that the earth was the Great mother of all creatures, Deucalion picked up
loose rocks and, bidding Pyrrha do likewise, cast them behind him. From these rocks there sprang forth a new and stalwart race of human beings, the rocks thrown by Deucalion be-coming men and those thrown by Pyrrha becoming women. In this allegory is epitomized the mystery of human evolution; for spirit, by ensouling matter, becomes that indwelling power which gradually but sequentially raises the mineral to the status of the plant; the plant to the plane of the animal; the animal to the dignity of man; and man to the estate of the gods.
The solar system was organized by forces operating inward from the great ring of the
saturnian sphere; and since the beginnings of all things were under the control of saturn, the most reasonable inference is that the first forms of worship were dedicated to him and his peculiar symbol – the stone. thus the intrinsic nature of saturn is synonymous with
that spiritual rock which is the enduring foundation of the solar temple, and has its antitypc or lower octave in that terrestrial rock – the planet Earth – which sustains upon its jagged surface the diversified genera of mundane life.

294although its origin is uncertain, litholatry undoubtedly constitutes one of the earliest
forms of religious expression.
“Throughout all the world, “ writes Godfrey Higgins, “the first object of Idolatry
seems to have been a plain, unwrought stone, placed in the ground, as an emblem of
the generative or procreative powers of nature.” (See The Celtic Druids.)
remnants of stone worship are distributed over the greater part of the earth’s surface,
a notable example being the menhirs at Carnac, in brittany, where several thousand gigantic uncut stones are arranged in eleven orderly rows. many of these monoliths stand
over twenty feet out of the sand in which they are embedded, and it has been calculated that some of the larger ones weigh as much as 250,000 pounds. By some it is believed that certain of the menhirs mark the location of buried treasure, but the most plausible view is that which regards Carnac as a monument to the astronomical knowledge of antiquity. scattered throughout the british isles and Europe, these cairns, dolmens, menhirs, and
cistvaens stand as mute but eloquent testimonials to the existence and achievements of races now extinct.
of particular interest are the rocking or logan stones, which evince the mechanical
skill of these early peoples. these relics consist of enormous boulders poised upon one
or two small points in such a manner that the slightest pressure will sway them, but the greatest effort is not sufficient to overthrow them. These were called living stones by the
Greeks and latins, the most famous one being the Gygorian stone in the strait of Gibraltar. though so perfectly balanced that it could be moved with the stalk of a daffodil, this rock could not be upset by the combined weight of many men. there is a legend that hercules raised a rocking stone over the graves of the two sons of boreas whom he had killed
in combat. this stone was so delicately poised that it swayed back and forth with the wind,
but no application of force could overturn it. a number of logan stones have been found
in Britain, traces of one no longer standing having been discovered in Stonehenge. (See The Celtic Druids.) it is interesting to note that the green stones forming the inner ring of
stonehenge are believed to have been brought from africa.
in many cases the monoliths are without carving or inscription, for they undoubtedly
antedate both the use of tools and the art of writing. in some instances the stones have
been trued into columns or obelisks, as in the runic monuments and the hindu lingams
and sakti stones; in other instances they are fashioned into rough likenesses of the human body, as in the Easter Island statues, or into the elaborately sculptured figures of the Central american indians and the Khmers of Cambodia. The first rough-stone images
can hardly be considered as effigies of any particular deity but rather as the crude effort of primitive man to portray in the enduring qualities of stone the procreative attributes of abstract Divinity. an instinctive recognition of the stability of Deity has persisted through
all the intervening ages between primitive man and modem civilization. Ample proof of the survival of litholatry in the Christian faith is furnished by allusions to the rock of refuge, the rock upon which the church of Christ was to be founded, the corner stone which the builders rejected, Jacob’s stony pillow which he set up and anointed with oil, the sling

295stone of David, the rock Moriah upon which the altar of King Solomon’s Temple was
erected, the white stone of revelation, and the Rock of Ages.
stones were highly venerated by prehistoric peoples primarily because of their usefulness. Jagged bits of stone were probably man’s first weapons; rocky cliffs and crags
constituted his first fortifications, and from these vantage points he hurled loose boulders down upon marauders. In caverns or rude huts fashioned from slabs of rock the first hu-mans protected themselves from the rigors of the elements. stones were set up as markers
and monuments to primitive achievement; they were also placed upon the graves of the dead, probably as a precautionary measure to prevent the depredations of wild beasts. During migrations, it was apparently customary for primitive peoples to carry about with them stones taken from their original habitat. as the homeland or birthplace of a race was
considered sacred, these stones were emblematic of that universal regard shared by all nations for the place of their geniture. The discovery that fire could be produced by strik-ing together two pieces of stone augmented man’s reverence for stones, but ultimately the hitherto unsuspected world of wonders opened by the newly discovered element of fire caused pyrolatry to supplant stone worship. The dark, cold Father – stone – gave birth out of itself to the bright, glowing Son-fire; and the newly born flame, by displacing its parent, became the most impressive and mysterious of all religio-philosophic symbols, widespread and enduring through the ages.
SATURN SWALLOWING THE STONE
SUBSTITUTED FOR JUPITER.
From Catrari’s
Imagini degli Dei degli Antichi .
saturn, having been warned by his parents
that one of his own children would dethrone
him, devoured each child at birth. at last rhea,
his wife, in order to save Jupiter, her sixth child
substituted for him a rock enveloped in swaddling clothes – which saturn, ignorant of the
deception practiced upon him, immediately
swallowed. Jupiter was concealed on the island
of Crete until he attained manhood, when he
forced his father to disgorge the five children
he had eaten. the stone swallowed by saturn in
lieu of his youngest son was placed by Jupiter
at Delphi, where it was held in great veneration
and was daily anointed.
the body of every thing was likened to a rock, trued either into a cube or more ornately
chiseled to form a pedestal, while the spirit of everything was likened to the elaborately

296carved figure surmounting it. Accordingly, altars were erected as a symbol of the lower
world, and fires were kept burning upon them to represent that spiritual essence illuminat -
ing the body it surmounted. The square is actually one surface of a cube, its corresponding figure in plane geometry, and its proper philosophic symbol. Consequently, when con-sidering the earth as an element and not as a body, the Greeks, brahmins, and Egyptians
always referred to its four corners, although they were fully aware that the planet itself was a sphere.
Because their doctrines were the sure foundation of all knowledge and the first step in
the attainment of conscious immortality, the mysteries were often represented as cubical
or pyramidal stones. Conversely, these stones themselves became the emblem of that con-dition of self-achieved godhood. the unchangeability of the stone made it an appropriate
emblem of God – the immovable and unchangeable source of Existence – and also of the
divine sciences – the eternal revelation of Himself to mankind. As the personification of the rational intellect, which is the true foundation of human life, mercury, or hermes, was
symbolized in a like manner. Square or cylindrical pillars, surmounted by a bearded head of Hermes and called hermæ, were set up in public places. Terminus, a form of Jupiter and god of boundaries and highways, from whose name is derived the modern word terminal,
was also symbolized by an upright stone, sometimes ornamented with the head of the god, which was placed at the borders of provinces and the intersections of important roads.
the philosopher’ s stone is really the philosophical stone, for philosophy is truly likened to a magic jewel whose touch transmutes base substances into priceless gems like itself. Wisdom is the alchemist’s powder of projection which transforms many thousand
times its own weight of gross ignorance into the precious substance of enlightenment.
THE TABLETS OF THE LAW
While upon the heights of Mount Sinai, Moses received from Jehovah two tablets
bearing the characters of the Decalogue traced by the very finger of Israel’s God. These tables were fashioned from the divine sapphire, schethiyâ, which the most high, after
removing from his own throne, had cast into the abyss to become the foundation and
generator of the worlds. this sacred stone, formed of heavenly dew, was sundered by the
breath of God, and upon the two parts were drawn in black fire the figures of the Law. these precious inscriptions, aglow with celestial splendor, were delivered by the lord on
the sabbath day into the hands of moses, who was able to read the illumined letters from the reverse side because of the transparency of the great jewel. (See The Secret Doctrine
in Israel or The Zohar for details of this legend.)
the ten Commandments are the ten shining gems placed by the holy one in the sapphire sea of Being, and in the depths of matter the reflections of these jewels are seen as the laws governing the sublunary spheres. they are the sacred ten by which the supreme
Deity has stamped his will upon the face of nature. this same decad was celebrated by
the Pythagoreans under the form of the tetractys – that triangle of spermatic points which reveals to the initiated the whole working of the cosmic scheme; for ten is the number of perfection, the key to creation, and the proper symbol of God, man, and the universe.