The Sun,
A Universal Deity
ThE ADORATION OF THE SUN was one of the earliest and most natural forms
of religious expression. Complex modern theologies are merely involvements
and amplifications of this simple aboriginal belief. The primitive mind, recognizing the beneficent power of the solar orb, adored it as the proxy of the Supreme Deity. Concerning the origin of sun worship, albert Pike makes the following concise statement
in his Morals and Dogma:
“To them [aboriginal peoples] he [the sun] was the innate fire of bodies, the fire
of Nature. Author of Life, heat, and ignition, he was to them the efficient cause of all generation, for without him there was no movement, no existence, no form. he
was to them immense, indivisible, imperishable, and everywhere present. it was
their need of light, and of his creative energy, that was felt by all men; and noth-ing was more fearful to them than his absence. His beneficent influences caused his identification with the Principle of Good; and the BRAHMA of the Hindus, and mithras of the Persians, and athom, amun, Phtha, and osiris, of
the Egyptians, the bEl of the Chaldeans, the aDonai of the Phœnicians, the
ADONIS and APOLLO of the Greeks, became but personifications of the Sun, the regenerating Principle, image of that fecundity which perpetuates and rejuvenates the world’s existence.”
Among all the nations of antiquity, altars, mounds, and temples were dedicated to the
worship of the orb of day. the ruins of these sacred places yet remain, notable among
them being the pyramids of Yucatan and Egypt, the snake mounds of the american indians, the Zikkurats of babylon and Chaldea, the round towers of ireland, and the massive
rings of uncut stone in britain and normandy. the tower of babel, which, according to
the scriptures, was built so that man might reach up to God, was probably an astronomical observatory.
many early priests and prophets, both pagan and Christian, were versed in astronomy
and astrology; their writings are best understood when read in the light of these ancient sciences. With the growth of man’s knowledge of the constitution and periodicity of the heavenly bodies, astronomical principles and terminology were introduced into his reli-gious systems. the tutelary gods were given planetary thrones, the celestial bodies being
named after the deities assigned to them. The fixed stars were divided into constellations, and through these constellations wandered the sun and its planets, the latter with their ac-companying satellites.

THE SOLAR TRINITY
The sun, as supreme among the celestial bodies visible to the astronomers of antiquity,
was assigned to the highest of the gods and became symbolic of the supreme authority of
the Creator Himself. From a deep philosophic consideration of the powers and principles of the sun has come the concept of the trinity as it is understood in the world today. the
tenet of a triune Divinity is not peculiar to Christian or mosaic theology, but forms a
conspicuous part of the dogma of the greatest religions of both ancient and modern times. the Persians, hindus, babylonians, and Egyptians had their trinities. in every instance
these represented the threefold form of one supreme intelligence. in modern masonry,
the Deity is symbolized by an equilateral triangle, its three sides representing the primary manifestations of the Eternal One who is Himself represented as a tiny flame, called by the hebrews Yod ( .)יJakob Böhme, the Teutonic mystic, calls the Trinity The Three Witnesses, by means of which the invisible is made known to the visible, tangible universe.
THE LION OF THE SUN.
From Maurice’ s Indian Antiquities .
the sun rising over the back of the
lion or, astrologically, in the back of
the lion, has always been considered
symbolic of power and rulership. a
symbol very similar to the one above
appears on the flag of Persia, whose
people have always been sun worshipers. Kings and emperors have
frequently associated their terrestrial
power with the celestial Power of the
solar orb, and have accepted the sun,
or one of its symbolic beasts or birds,
as their emblem. Witness the lion of
the Great mogul and the eagles of
Cæsar and Napoleon.

134the origin of the trinity is obvious to anyone who will observe the daily manifestations of the sun. this orb, being the symbol of all light, has three distinct phases: rising,
midday, and setting. the philosophers therefore divided the life of all things into three distinct parts: growth, maturity, and decay. between the twilight of dawn and the twilight of
evening is the high noon of resplendent glory. God the Father, the Creator of the world, is
symbolized by the dawn. His color is blue, because the sun rising in the morning is veiled in blue mist. God the Son he Illuminating One sent to bear witness of His Father before all the worlds, is the celestial globe at noonday, radiant and magnificent, the maned Lion of Judah, the Golden-haired Savior of the World. Yellow is His color and His power is without end. God the Holy Ghost is the sunset phase, when the orb of day, robed in flam-ing red, rests for a moment upon the horizon line and then vanishes into the darkness of the night to wandering the lower worlds and later rise again triumphant from the embrace of darkness.
to the Egyptians the sun was the symbol of immortality, for, while it died each night, it
rose again with each ensuing dawn. not only has the sun this diurnal activity, but it also has
its annual pilgrimage, during which time it passes successively through the twelve celestial houses of the heavens, remaining in each for thirty days. added to these it has a third path
of travel, which is called the precession of the equinoxes, in which it retrogrades around
the zodiac through the twelve signs at the rate of one degree every seventy-two years.
Concerning the annual passage of the sun through the twelve houses of the heavens,
Robert Hewitt Brown, 32°, makes the following statement:
“The Sun, as he pursued his way among these ‘living creatures’ of the zodiac,
was said, in allegorical language, either to assume the nature of or to triumph over the sign he entered. the sun thus became a bull in taurus, and was worshipped as
such by the Egyptians under the name of apis, and by the assyrians as bel, baal,
or bul. in leo the sun became a lion-slayer, hercules, and an archer in sagittarius. In Pisces, the Fishes, he was a fish – Dagon, or Vishnu, the fish-god of the Philistines and hindoos.”
a careful analysis of the religious systems of pagandom uncovers much evidence of
the fact that its priests served the solar energy and that their supreme Deity was in every
case this Divine Light personified. Godfrey Higgins, after thirty years of inquiry into the origin of religious beliefs, is of the opinion that:
“All the Gods of antiquity resolved themselves into the solar fire, sometimes
itself as God, or sometimes an emblem or shekinah of that higher principle, known by the name of the creative being or God.”
the Egyptian priests in many of their ceremonies wore the skins of lions, which were
symbols of the solar orb, owing to the fact that the sun is exalted, dignified, and most for -
tunately placed in the constellation of leo, which he rules and which was at one time the
keystone of the celestial arch. again, hercules is the solar Deity, for as this mighty hunter

135performed his twelve labors, so the sun, in traversing the twelve houses of the zodiacal
band, performs during his pilgrimage twelve essential and benevolent labors for the hu-man race and for nature in general, hercules, like the Egyptian priests, wore the skin of a
lion for a girdle. samson, the hebrew hero, as his name implies, is also a solar deity. his
fight with the Nubian lion, his battles with the Philistines, who represent the Powers of Darkness, and his memorable feat of carrying off the gates of Gaza, all refer to aspects of solar activity. many of the ancient peoples had more than one solar deity; in fact, all of the
gods and goddesses were supposed to partake, in part at least, of the sun’s effulgence.
THE WINGED GLOBE OF EGYPT.
From Maurice’ s Indian Antiquities .
this symbol, which appears over the Pylons or gates of many Egyptian palaces and temples, is emblematic of the three persons of the Egyptian trinity. the wings, the serpents, and the solar orb are the insignia
of ammon, ra, and osiris.
the golden ornaments used by the priestcraft of the various world religions are again
a subtle reference to the solar energy, as are also the crowns of kings. in ancient times,
crowns had a number of points extending outward like the rays of the sun, but modern conventionalism has, in many cases, either removed the points or else bent: them inward, gathered them together, and placed an orb or cross upon the point where they meet. many
of the ancient prophets, philosophers, and dignitaries carried a scepter, the upper end of which bore a representation of the solar globe surrounded by emanating rays. all the kingdoms of earth were but copies of the kingdoms of heaven, and the kingdoms of heaven
were best symbolized by the solar kingdom, in which the sun was the supreme ruler, the planets his privy council, and all nature the subjects of his empire.
many deities have been associated with the sun. the Greeks believed that apollo, bacchus, Dionysos, Sabazius, Hercules, Jason, Ulysses, Zeus, Uranus, and Vulcan partook of either the visible or invisible attributes of the sun. the norwegians regarded balder the
beautiful as a solar deity, and odin is often connected with the celestial orb, especially
because of his one eye. among the Egyptians, osiris, ra, anubis, hermes, and even the
mysterious ammon himself had points of resemblance with the solar disc. isis was the
mother of the sun, and even typhon, the Destroyer, was supposed to be a form of solar
energy. The Egyptian sun myth finally centered around the person of a mysterious deity called Serapis. the two Central american deities, Tezcatlipoca and Quetzalcoatl , while
often associated with the winds, were also undoubtedly solar gods.
in masonry the sun has many symbols. one expression of the solar energy is solomon,
whose name sol-om-on is the name for the supreme light in three different languages.