394An Analysis of
Tarot Cards
OPinions OF AUTHORITIES DIFFER widely concerning the origin of playing cards, the purpose for which they were intended, and the time of their
introduction into Europe. in his researches into the history of Playing Cards,
samuel Weller singer advances the opinion that cards reached southern Europe from india by way of arabia. it is probable that the tarot cards were part of the magical and philosophical lore secured by the Knights Templars from the Saracens or one of the mystical sects then flourishing in Syria. Returning to Europe, the Templars, to avoid persecution, concealed the arcane meaning of the symbols by introducing the leaves of their magical book ostensibly as a device for amusement and gambling. in support of this contention,
Mrs. John King Van Rensselaer states:
“that cards were brought by the home-returning warriors, who imported many
of the newly acquired customs and habits of the Orient to their own countries, seems to be a well-established fact; and it does not contradict the statement made by some writers who declared that the gypsies – who about that time began to wander over Europe – brought with them and introduced cards, which they used, as they do at the present day, for divining the future.” (See The Devil’ s Picture Books.)
through the Gypsies the tarot cards may be traced back to the religious symbolism
of the ancient Egyptians. in his remarkable work, The Gypsies, samuel roberts presents
ample proof of their Egyptian origin. in one place he writes:
“When Gypsies originally arrived in England is very uncertain. They are first
noticed in our laws, by several statutes against them in the reign of henry viii.; in
which they are described as ‘an outlandish people, calling themselves Egyptians, – who do not profess any craft or trade, but go about in great numbers, (...).’”
a curious legend relates that after the destruction of the serapeum in alexandria, the
large body of attendant priests banded themselves together to preserve the secrets of the rites of Serapis. Their descendants (Gypsies) carrying with them the most precious of the volumes saved from the burning library – the Book of Enoch, or Thoth (the Tarot) – became wanderers upon the face of the earth, remaining a people apart with an ancient language and a birthright of magic and mystery.
Court de Gébelin believed the word tarot itself to be derived from two Egyptian
words, Tar, meaning “road,” and Ro, meaning “royal.” thus the tarot constitutes the

395royal road to wisdom. (See Le Monde Primitif.) in his History of Magic, P. Christian,
the mouthpiece of a certain French secret society, presents a fantastic account of a
purported initiation into the Egyptian mysteries wherein the 22 major tarots assume
the proportions of trestleboards of immense size and line a great gallery. Stopping before each card in turn, the initiator described its symbolism to the candidate. Ed-ouard schuré, whose source of information was similar to that of Christian’s, hints at
the same ceremony in his chapter on initiation into the Hermetic Mysteries. (See The
Great Initiates.) While the Egyptians may well have employed the tarot cards in their
rituals, these French mystics present no evidence other than their own assertions to support this theory. the validity also of the so-called Egyptian tarots now in circulation has never been satisfactorily established. The drawings are not only quite modem but the symbolism itself savors of French rather than Egyptian influence.
the tarot is undoubtedly a vital element in rosicrucian symbolism, possibly the
very book of universal knowledge which the members of the order claimed to possess. the Rota Mundi is a term frequently occurring in the early manifestoes of the Frater -
nity of the rose Cross. the word Rota by a rearrangement of its letters becomes Taro ,
the ancient name of these mysterious cards. W. F. C. Wigston has discovered evidence that Sir Francis Bacon employed the Tarot symbolism in his ciphers. The numbers 21, 56, and 78, which are all directly related to the divisions of the Tarot deck, are frequently involved in Bacon’s cryptograms. In the great Shakespearian Folio of 1623 the Christian name of Lord Bacon appears 21 times on page 56 of the Histories. (See The Columbus of Literature.)
Many symbols appearing upon the Tarot cards have definite Masonic interest. The
Pythagorean numerologist will also find an important relationship to exist between the numbers on the cards and the designs accompanying the numbers. the Qabbalist will be
immediately impressed by the significant sequence of the cards, and the alchemist will discover certain emblems meaningless save to one versed in the divine chemistry of trans-mutation and regeneration.’ as the Greeks placed the letters of their alphabet – with their
corresponding numbers – upon the various parts of the body of their humanly represented Logos, so the tarot cards have an analogy not only in the parts and members of the universe but also in the divisions of the human body.. they are in fact the key to the magical
constitution of man.
The Tarot cards must be considered (1) as separate and complete hieroglyphs,
each representing a distinct principle, law, power, or element in Nature; (2) in rela-tion to each other as the effect of one agent operating upon another; and (3) as vow-els and consonants of a philosophic alphabet. the laws governing all phenomena
are represented by the symbols upon the tarot cards, whose numerical values are
equal to the numerical equivalents of the phenomena. As every structure consists of certain elemental parts, so the tarot cards represent the components of the structure
of philosophy. irrespective of the science or philosophy with which the student is
working, the tarot cards can be identified with the essential constituents of his subject, each card thus being related to a specific part according to mathematical and philosophical laws.

396“an imprisoned person,” writes Eliphas levi, “with no other book than the
Tarot, if he knew how to use it, could in a few years acquire universal knowledge,
and would be able to speak on all subjects with unequalled learning and inexhaust -
ible eloquence. “ (See Transcendental Magic .)
The diverse opinions of eminent authorities on the Tarot symbolism are quite irrecon -
cilable. The conclusions of the scholarly Court de Gébelin and the bizarre Grand Etteila – the first authorities on the subject – not only are at radical variance but both are equally discredited by levi, whose arrangement of the tarot trumps was rejected in turn by arthur
Edward Waite and Paul Case as being an effort to mislead students. the followers of levi
– especially Papus, Christian, Westcott, and schuré-are regarded by the “reformed tarotists” as honest but benighted individuals who wandered in darkness for lack of Pamela Coleman smith’s new deck of tarot cards with revisions by mr. Waite.
Most writers on the Tarot (Mr. Waite a notable exception) have proceeded upon the
hypothesis that the 22 major trumps represent the letters of the hebrew alphabet. this
supposition is based upon nothing more substantial than the coincidence that both consist of 22 parts. that Postel, st. martin, and levi all wrote books divided into sections corresponding to the major tarots is an interesting sidelight on the subject. the major trump
cards portray incidents from the Book of Revelation; and the Apocalypse of St. John is also divided into 22 chapters. assuming the Qabbalah to hold the solution to the tarot
riddle, seekers have often ignored other possible lines of research. the task, however,
of discovering the proper relationship sustained by the tarot trumps to the letters of the
hebrew alphabet and the Paths of Wisdom thus far has not met with any great measure of success. the major trumps of the tarot and the 22 letters of the hebrew alphabet cannot be
synchronized without first fixing the correct place of the unnumbered, or zero, card – Le
Mat, the Fool. Levi places this card between the 20th and 21st Tarots, assigning to it the Hebrew letter Shin ( .)שThe same order is followed by Papus, Christian, and Waite, the last, however, declaring this arrangement to be incorrect. Westcott makes the zero card the 22nd of the tarot major trumps. on the other hand, both Court de Gébelin and Paul Case
place the unnumbered card before the first numbered card of the major trumps, for if the natural order of the numbers (according to either the Pythagorean or Qabbalistic system) be adhered to, the zero card must naturally precede the number 1.
this does not dispose of the problem, however, for efforts to assign a hebrew letter
to each Tarot trump in sequence produce an effect far from convincing. Mr. Waite, who reedited the tarot, expresses himself thus: “i am not to be included among those who are
satisfied that there is a valid correspondence between Hebrew letters and Tarot Trump symbols.” (See introduction to The Book of Formation by Knut Stenring.) The real explanation may be that the major Tarots no longer are in the same sequence as when they formed the leaves of hermes’ sacred book, for the Egyptians – or even their arabian
successors – could have purposely confused the cards so that their secrets might be bet-ter preserved. mr. Case has developed a system which, while superior to most, depends
largely upon two debatable points, namely, the accuracy of mr. Waite’s revised tarot and
the justification for assigning the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet to the unnumbered, or

397zero, card. Since Aleph (the first Hebrew letter) has the numerical value of 1, its assignment to the zero card is equivalent to the statement that zero is equal to the letter Aleph
and therefore synonymous with the number 1.
EARLY PORTUGUESE CARDS.
From Chatto’s
Origin and History of Playing Cards.
in writing of the deck from which
the four cavaliers (jacks) here
reproduced were taken, William
andrew Chatto notes: “some of
the specimens of Portuguese cards
given in the ‘Jeux de Cartes, Tarots
et de Cartes numérales’ have very
much the appearance of having
been originally suggested by, if net
copied from, an oriental type; more
especially in the suits of Danari
and bastani, – money and Clubs.
In those cards the circular figure,
generally understood as representing Danari, or money, is certainly
much more like the Chakra, or quoit
of Vichnou [Vishnu], as seen in Hindostanic drawings, than a piece of
coin; while on the top of the Club is
a diamond proper, which is another
of the attributes of the same deity.”
also worthy of note are the rosicrucian and masonic emblems appear -
ing on various mediæval decks. As
the secrets of these organizations
were often concealed in cryptic
engravings, it is very probable that
the enigmatic diagrams upon various decks of cards were used both to
conceal and to perpetuate the political and philosophical arcana of these orders. the frontispiece of mr.
Chatto’s books shows a knave of hearts bearing a shield emblazoned with a crowned Rosicrucian rose.
With rare insight, Court de Gébelin assigned the zero card to AIN SOPH, the Unknowable First Cause. As the central panel of the Bembine Table represents the Creative Power
surrounded by seven triads of manifesting divinities, so may the zero card represent that Eternal Power of which the 21 surrounding or manifesting aspects are but limited expres-sions. If the 21 major trumps be considered as limited forms existing in the abstract sub-stance of the zero card, it then becomes their common denominator. Which letter, then, of the hebrew alphabet is the origin of all the remaining letters? the answer is apparent:
Yod. In the presence of so many speculations, one more may not offend. The zero card – Le Mat, the Fool – has been likened to the material universe because the mortal sphere is