Wonders of Antiquity
It Was a Common PraCtiCE among the early Egyptians, Greeks, and
romans to seal lighted lamps in the sepulchers of their dead as offerings to the
God of Death. Possibly it was also believed that the deceased could use these
lights in finding his way through the Valley of the Shadow. Later as the custom became generally established, not only actual lamps but miniatures of them in terra cotta were bur-ied with the dead. some of the lamps were enclosed in circular vessels for protection; and
instances have been recorded in which the original oil was found in them, in a perfect state of preservation, after more than 2,000 years. there is ample proof that many of these lamps
were burning when the sepulchers were sealed, and it has been declared that they were still burning when the vaults were opened hundreds of years later. the possibility of preparing
a fuel which would renew itself as rapidly as it was consumed has been a source of con-siderable controversy among mediæval authors. After due consideration of the evidence at hand, it seems well within the range of possibility that the ancient priest-chemists did manufacture lamps that burned, if not indefinitely, at least for considerable periods of time.
numerous authorities have written on the subject of ever-burning lamps. W. Wynn
Westcott estimates the number of writers who have given the subject consideration as more than 150, and H. P. Blavatsky as 173. While conclusions reached by different au-thors are at variance, a majority admit the existence of these phenomenal lamps. only a
few maintained that the lamps would burn forever, but many were willing to concede that they might remain alight for several centuries without replenishment of the fuel. some
considered the so-called perpetual lights as mere artifices of the crafty pagan priests, while a great many, admitting that the lamps actually burned, made the sweeping assertion that the Devil was using this apparent miracle to ensnare the credulous and thereby lead their souls to perdition.
On this subject the learned Jesuit, Athanasius Kircher, usually dependable, exhibits a
striking inconsistency. in his Œdipus Ægyptiacus he writes:
“not a few of these ever-burning lamps have been found to be the devices of
devils, (...) And I take it that all the lamps found in the tombs of the Gentiles dedi-cated to the worship of certain gods, were of this kind, not because they burned, or have been reported to burn, with a perpetual flame, but because probably the devil set them there, maliciously intending thereby to obtain fresh credence for a false worship.”
having admitted that dependable authorities defend the existence of the ever-burning
lamps, and that even the Devil lends himself to their manufacture, Kircher next declared the entire theory to be desperate and impossible, and to be classed with perpetual motion

176and the Philosopher’s stone. having already solved the problem to his satisfaction once,
Kircher solves it again – but differently – in the following words:
“in Egypt there are rich deposits of asphalt and petroleum. What did these
clever fellows [the priests] do, then, but connect an oil deposit by a secret duct
with one or more lamps, provided with wicks of asbestos! how could such lamps
help burning perpetually? (...) In my opinion this is the solution of the riddle of the supernatural everlastingness of these ancient lamps.”
montfaucon, in his Antiquities, agrees in the main with the later deductions of Kircher,
believing the fabled perpetual lamps of the temples to be cunning mechanical contrivanc-es. He further adds that the belief that lamps burned indefinitely in tombs was the result of the noteworthy fact that in some cases fumes resembling smoke poured forth from the entrances of newly opened vaults. Parties going in later and discovering lamps scattered about the floor assumed that they were the source of the fumes.
there are several interesting stories concerning the discoveries of ever-burning lamps
in various parts of the world. in a tomb on the appian Way which was opened during the
papacy of Paul iii was found a burning lamp which had remained alight in a hermetically
sealed vault for nearly 1,600 years. According to an account written by a contemporary, a body – that of a young and beautiful girl with long golden hair – was found floating in an unknown transparent liquid and as well preserved as though death had occurred but a few hours before. About the interior of the vault were a number of significant objects, which included several lamps, one of them alight. those entering the sepulcher declared
that the draft caused by the opening of the door blew out the light and the lamp could not be relighted. Kircher reproduces an epitaph, “TULLIOLAE FILIAE MEAE,” supposedly found in the tomb, but which montfaucon declares never existed, the latter adding that
although conclusive evidence was not found, the body was generally believed to be that of tulliola, the daughter of Cicero.
Ever-burning lamps have been discovered in all parts of the world. not only the mediterranean countries but also india, tibet, China, and south america have contributed records of lights which burned continuously without fuel. the examples which follow were
selected at random from the imposing list of perpetual lamps found in different ages.
Plutarch wrote of a lamp that burned over the door of a temple to Jupiter Ammon; the
priests declared that it had remained alight for centuries without fuel.
st. augustine described a perpetual lamp, guarded in a temple in Egypt sacred to venus,
which neither wind nor water could extinguish. he believed it to be the work of the Devil.
an ever-burning lamp was found at Edessa, or antioch, during the reign of the Emperor Justinian. It was in a niche over the city gate, elaborately enclosed to protect it from the elements. The date upon it proved that the lamp had been burning for more than 500 years. it was destroyed by soldiers.
During the early middle ages a lamp was found in England which had burned since
the third century after Christ. the monument containing it was believed to be the tomb of
the father of Constantine the Great.

The Lantern of Pallas was discovered near Rome in A.D. 1401. It was found in the
sepulcher of Pallas, son of Evander, immortalized by Virgil in his Æneid. the lamp
was placed at the head of the body and had burned with a steady glow for more than
2,000 years.
In A.D. 1550 on the island of Nesis, in the Bay of Naples, a magnificent marble vault
was opened in which was found a lamp still alight which had been placed there before the beginning of the Christian Era.
Pausanias described a beautiful golden lamp in the temple of minerva which burned
steadily for a year without refueling or having the wick trimmed. The ceremony of filling the lamp took place annually, and time was measured by the ceremony.
according to the Fama Fraternitatis , the crypt of Christian Rosencreutz when opened
120 years after his death was found to be brilliantly illuminated by a perpetual lamp sus-pended from the ceiling.
Numa Pompilius, King of Rome and magician of considerable power, caused a perpet -
ual light to burn in the dome of a temple he had created in honor of an elemental being.
in England a curious tomb was found containing an automaton which moved when
certain stones in the floor of the vault were stepped upon by an intruder. At that time the rosicrucian controversy was at its height, so it was decided that the tomb was that of a rosicrucian initiate. a countryman, discovering the tomb and entering, found the interior
brilliantly lighted by a lamp hanging from the ceiling. as he walked, his weight depressed
some of the floor stones. At once a seated figure in heavy armor began to move. Mechani -
cally it rose to its feet and struck the lamp with an iron baton, completely destroying it, and thus effectually preventing the discovery of the secret substance which maintained the flame. How long the lamp had burned is unknown, but certainly it had been for a consider -
able number of years.
it is related that among the tombs near memphis and in the brahmin temples of india
lights have been found in sealed chambers and vessels, but sudden exposure to the air has extinguished them and caused their fuel to evaporate.
it is now believed that the wicks of these perpetual lamps were made of braided or
woven asbestos, called by the alchemists salamander’ s wool, and that the fuel was one
of the products of alchemical research. Kircher attempted to extract oil from asbestos, being convinced that as the substance itself was indestructible by fire an oil extracted from it would supply the lamp with a fuel likewise indestructible. after spending two
years in fruitless experimental work, he concluded that the task was impossible of ac-complishment.
Several formulæ for the making of the fuel for the lamps have been preserved.
in Isis Unveiled, H. P. Blavatsky reprints two of these formulæ from early authors –
Tritenheim and Bartolomeo Korndorf. One will suffice to give a general understand-ing of the process:
“Sulphur. Alum ust. a ℥ iv.; sublime them into flowers to ℥ ij., of which add of
crystalline Venetian borax (powdered) ℥ j.; upon these affuse high rectified spirit
of wine and digest it, then abstract it and pour on fresh; repeat this so often till the

178sulphur melts like wax without any smoke, upon a hot plate of brass: this is for
the pabulum, but the wick is to be prepared after this manner: gather the threads
or thrums of the Lapis asbestos, to the thickness of your middle and the length
of your little finger, then put them into a Venetian glass, and covering them over with the aforesaid depurated sulphur or aliment set the glass in sand for the space of twenty-four hours, so hot that the sulphur may bubble all the while. the wick
being thus besmeared and anointed, is to be put into a glass like a scallop-shell, in such manner that some part of it may lie above the mass of prepared sulphur; then setting this glass upon hot sand, you must melt the sulphur, so that it may lay hold of the wick, and when it is lighted, it will burn with a perpetual flame and you may set this lamp in any place where you please.”
THE GREEK ORACLES
the worship of apollo included the establishment and maintenance of places of prophecy by means of which the gods could communicate with mankind and reveal futurity to such as deserved the boon. the early history of Greece abounds with accounts of talking trees, rivers, statues, and caves in which nymphs, dryads, or dæmons had taken up their abodes and from which they delivered oracles. While Christian authors have tried to prove that oracular revelations were delivered by the Devil for the purpose of mislead-ing humanity, they have not dared to attack the theory of oracles, because of the repeated reference to it in their own sacred writings. if the onyx stones on the shoulders of israel’s
high priest made known by their flashings the will of Jehovah, then a black dove, tempo -
rarily endowed with the faculty of speech, could indeed pronounce oracles in the temple of Jupiter Ammon. If the witch of Endor could invoke the shade of Samuel, who in turn gave prophecies to saul, could not a priestess of apollo call up the specter of her liege to
foretell the destiny of Greece?
The most famous oracles of antiquity were those of Delphi, Dodona, Trophonius, and
latona, of which the talking oak trees of Dodona were the oldest. though it is impossible
to trace back to the genesis of the theory of oracular prophecy, it is known that many of the caves and fissures set aside by the Greeks as oracles were sacred long before the rise of Greek culture.
the oracle of apollo at Delphi remains one of the unsolved mysteries of the ancients.
alexander Wilder derives the name Delphi from delphos, the womb. this name was chosen by the Greeks be cause of the shape of the cavern and the vent leading into the depths of the earth. the original name of the oracle was Pytho, so called because its chambers
had been the abode of the great serpent Python, a fearsome creature that had crept out of
the slime left by the receding flood that had destroyed all human beings except Deucalion and Pyrrha. apollo, climbing the side of mount Parnassus, slew the serpent after a prolonged combat, and threw the body down the fissure of the oracle. From that time the Sun God, surnamed the Pythian apollo, gave oracles from the vent. With Dionysos he shared
the honor of being the patron god of Delphi.