The Zodiac and Its Signs
It IS DIFFICULT FOR THIS AGE to estimate correctly the profound effect
produced upon the religions, philosophies, and sciences of antiquity by the
study of the planets, luminaries, and constellations. Not without adequate reason were the Magi of Persia called the Star Gazers. The Egyptians were honored with a special appellation because of their proficiency in computing the power and motion of the heavenly bodies and their effect upon the destinies of nations and individuals. ruins
of primitive astronomical observatories have been discovered in all parts of the world, although in many cases modern archæologists are unaware of the true purpose for which these structures were erected. While the telescope was unknown to ancient astronomers, they made many remarkable calculations with instruments cut from blocks of granite or pounded from sheets of brass and cop per. in india such instruments are still in use, and
they posses a high degree of accuracy. In Jaipur, Rajputana, India, an observatory consist-ing largely of immense stone sundials is still in operation. the famous Chinese observatory on the wall of Peking consists of immense bronze instruments, including a telescope in the form of a hollow tube without lenses.
The pagans looked upon the stars as living things, capable of influencing the destinies
of individuals, nations, and races. That the early Jewish patriarchs believed that the celes -
tial bodies participated in the affairs of men is evident to any student of biblical literature,
as, for example, in the Book of Judges:
“they fought from heaven, even the stars in their courses fought against sisera.”
The Chaldeans, Phœnicians, Egyptians, Persians, Hindus, and Chinese all had zodiacs
that were much alike in general character, and different authorities have credited each of
these nations with being the cradle of astrology and astronomy. the Central and north
American Indians also had an understanding of the zodiac, but the patterns and numbers of the signs differed in many details from those of the Eastern hemisphere.
the word zodiac is derived from the Greek ζωδιακός (zodiakos), which means “a
circle of animals,” or, as some believe, “little animals.” it is the name given by the old
pagan astronomers to a band of fixed stars about sixteen degrees wide, apparently encircl -
ing the earth. Robert Hewitt Brown, 32°, states that the Greek word zodiakos comes from zo-on, meaning “an animal.” he adds: “this latter word is compounded directly from the
primitive Egyptian radicals, zo, life, and on, a being.”
The Greeks, and later other peoples influenced by their culture, divided the band of
the zodiac into twelve sections, each being sixteen degrees in width and thirty degrees in length. these divisions were called the houses of the Zodiac. the sun during its annual pilgrimage passed through each of these in turn, imaginary creatures were traced

147in the star groups bounded by these rectangles; and because most of them were animal
– or part animal – in form, they later became known as the Constellations, or signs, of
the Zodiac.
There is a popular theory concerning the origin of the zodiacal creatures to the effect
that they were products of the imagination of shepherds, who, watching their flocks at
night, occupied their minds by tracing the forms of animals and birds in the heavens. this
theory is untenable, unless the “shepherds” be regarded as the shepherd priests of antiq -
uity. It is unlikely that the zodiacal signs were derived from the star groups which they now represent. it is far more probable that the creatures assigned to the twelve houses are
symbolic of the qualities and intensity of the sun’s power while it occupies different parts of the zodiacal belt.
On this subject Richard Payne Knight writes:
“the emblematical meaning, which certain animals were employed to signify,
was only some particular property generalized; and, therefore, might easily be in-vented or discovered by the natural operation of the mind: but the collections of stars, named after certain animals, have no resemblance whatever to those animals; which are therefore merely signs of convention adopted to distinguish certain por-tions of the heavens, which were probably consecrated to those particular personi-fied attributes, which they respectively represented.” (The Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology .)
Some authorities are of the opinion that the zodiac was originally divided into ten
(instead of twelve) houses, or “solar mansions.” In early times there were two separate standards – one solar and the other lunar – used for the measurement of the months, years, and seasons. The solar year was composed of ten months of thirty-six days each, and five days sacred to the gods. the lunar year consisted of thirteen months of twenty-eight days
each, with one day left over. The solar zodiac at that time consisted often houses of thirty-six degrees each.
The first six signs of the zodiac of twelve signs were regarded as benevolent, because
the sun occupied them while traversing the Northern Hemisphere. The 6,000 years dur -
ing which, according to the Persians, Ahura-Mazda ruled His universe in harmony and peace, were symbolic of these six signs. the second six were considered malevolent,
because while the sun was traveling the southern hemisphere it was winter with the
Greeks, Egyptians, and Persians. Therefore these six months symbolic of the 6,000 years of misery and suffering caused by the evil genius of the Persians, ahriman, who sought to
overthrow the power of Ahura-Mazda.
Those who hold the opinion that before its revision by the Greeks the zodiac consisted
of only ten signs adduce evidence to show that Libra (the Scales) was inserted into the zodiac by dividing the constellation of Virgo Scorpio (at that time one sign) into two parts, thus establishing “the balance” at the point of equilibrium between the ascending northern and the descending southern signs. (See The Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries, by
Hargrave Jennings.) On this subject Isaac Myer states:

148“We think that the Zodiacal constellations were first ten and represented an
immense androgenic man or deity; subsequently this was changed, resulting in
scorpio and virgo and making eleven; after this from scorpio, libra, the balance,
was taken, making the present twelve.” ( The Qabbalah.)
CHART SHOWING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE HUMAN BODY
AND THE EXTERIOR UNIVERSE.
From Kircher’s Œdipus Ægyptiacus .
the ornamental border contains groups of names of animal, mineral, and vegetable substances, their
relationship to corresponding parts of the human body is shown by the dotted lines. the words in capital
letters on the dotted lines indicate to what corporeal member, organ, or disease, the herb or other substance is related. The favorable positions in relation to the time of year are shown by the signs of the zodiac, each house of which is divided by crosses into its three decans. This influence is further emphasized by the series of planetary signs placed on either side of the figure.
Each year the sun passes entirely around the zodiac and returns to the point from
which it started – the vernal equinox – and each year it falls just a little short of making the complete circle of the heavens in the allotted period of time. as a result, it crosses
the equator just a little behind the spot in the zodiacal sign where it crossed the previous

149year. Each sign of the zodiac consists of thirty degrees, and as the sun loses about one
degree every seventy two years, it regresses through one entire constellation (or sign) in approximately 2,160 years, and through the entire zodiac in about 25,920 years. (Authori-ties disagree concerning these figures.) This retrograde motion is called the precession of
the equinoxes. This means that in the course of about 25,920 years, which constitute one Great solar or Platonic Year, each one of the twelve constellations occupies a position at
the vernal equinox for nearly 2,160 years, then gives place to the previous sign.
Among the ancients the sun was always symbolized by the figure and nature of the
constellation through which it passed at the vernal equinox. For nearly the past 2,000 years the sun has crossed the equator at the vernal equinox in the constellation of Pisces (the Two Fishes). For the 2,160 years before that it crossed through the constellation of Aries (the Ram). Prior to that the vernal equinox was in the sign of Taurus (the Bull). It is probable that the form of the bull and the bull’s proclivities were assigned to this constel-lation because the bull was used by the ancients to plow the fields, and the season set aside for plowing and furrowing corresponded to the time at which the sun reached the segment of the heavens named taurus.
albert Pike describes the reverence which the Persians felt for this sign and the method of astrological symbolism in vogue among them, thus:
“in Zoroaster’s cave of initiation, the sun and Planets were represented, overhead, in gems and gold, as was also the Zodiac. the sun appeared, emerging from
the back of taurus.“
in the constellation of the bull are also to be found the “seven sisters” – the sacred Pleiades – famous to Freemasonry as the Seven Stars at the upper end of the Sacred Ladder.
In ancient Egypt it was during this period – when the vernal equinox was in the sign
of taurus – that the bull, apis, was sacred to the sun God, who was worshiped through
the animal equivalent of the celestial sign which he had impregnated with his presence at the time of its crossing into the northern hemisphere. this is the meaning of an ancient
saying that the celestial bull “broke the egg of the year with his horns.”
sampson arnold mackey, in his Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients Demonstrated,
makes note of two very interesting points concerning the bull in Egyptian symbolism. mr.
mackey is of the opinion that the motion of the earth that we know as the alternation of the
poles has resulted in a great change of relative position of the equator and the zodiacal band. He believes that originally the band of the zodiac was at right angles to the equator, with the sign of Cancer opposite the north pole and the sign of Capricorn opposite the south pole. it
is possible that the orphic symbol of the serpent twisted around the egg attempts to show the
motion of the sun in relation to the earth under such conditions. mr. mackey advances the
Labyrinth of Crete, the name Abraxas, and the magic formula, abracadabra, among other
things, to substantiate his theory. Concerning abracadabra he states:
“but the slow progressive disappearance of the bull is most happily commemorated in the vanishing series of letters so emphatically expressive of the great